United Nations
Report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
General Assembly
General Assembly Official Records Fifty-fifth session Supplement No. 14 (A/55/14)
United Nations • New York, 2000
Report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures.
Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Contents
The present report covers the period from 1 July 1998 to 30 June 2000.
It mainly contains short descriptions of ongoing programmes and statistics of participation, per region and per country.
Over the last number of years, each of the programmes has designed and distributed specific information brochures.
The Programme of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) is available upon request, and further details are accessible on-line: www.unitar.org.
The restructuring period of UNITAR has been completed with success.
Consolidation and expansion have commenced.
The three questions to be addressed in this brief introduction are what has been accomplished, where does UNITAR now stand and what are the main challenges and issues ahead.
In order to establish an institutional memory and open avenues for further development of training and capacity-building in the United Nations, some general reflections have been prepared and will appear in an annex to the report of activities.
Accomplishments during the restructuring period
The various resolutions of the General Assembly and the recommendations made by the United Nations responsible bodies since 1993 have been followed up and implemented.
The main issues are briefly reviewed below.
Programme focus: UNITAR has identified several domains in which it could meet precise needs for training and capacity-building, corresponding to recent trends in the development of the Organization's activities in negotiations and conflict prevention, sustainable development and financial management and governance.
Cooperation with training institutions: Cooperation has been maintained and increased with national, regional and international institutions, particularly those having centres based in developing countries and countries with economies in transition.
The necessity of maintaining a balanced budget: UNITAR is fully self-funded.
No funding or subsidies are received from the regular budget of the United Nations.
The level of non-earmarked contributions to the General Fund remains low, making it difficult for the Institute to answer a great part of training requests received from developing countries and countries with economies in transition.
Recurrent appeals of the General Assembly to all Governments for support have had limited impact thus far.
The level of funds allocated to special purpose grants is satisfactory.
All the resolutions of the General Assembly which UNITAR was in a position to follow up directly have been implemented.
The same is true of the recommendations of the United Nations Board of Auditors, which were that the accounts of UNITAR be prepared, certified and audited on a biennial (and no longer on an annual) basis.
Finally, in its last report on UNITAR (dated 9 March 2000), the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions also commended the Institute for the implementation of all its previous recommendations.
In their reflections on the future of UNITAR (A/54/390, annex), the members of the Board of Trustees stated that “the fact that UNITAR had turned itself around, from an institution which had lost much of its credibility and utility just a few years ago to one which is as highly focused and as successful as it is now, is indeed a source of satisfaction for all concerned.
The credit for this goes primarily to the Executive Director and to his exemplary personal rigour and sense of direction.
As part of the support and guidance team, the Trustees too can justifiably share in the happy results produced by an institution which is now recognized by all as useful, healthy and solvent.
The ultimate test for a United Nations institution comes in the verdict of the Member States, and that is why the General Assembly resolutions on UNITAR speak for themselves.
Present situation of the Institute
In the early 1990s, the future of UNITAR seemed bleak: heavy debt and financial crisis, total loss of credibility, de-motivated staff leaving the organization, poor vision of the future, expensive and often extraneous programmes.
The gravity of the situation became to some extent an advantage, in the sense that it demanded a fresh start and imposed, by necessity, a type of management and leadership based on the concepts of the so-called new public management, namely:
(a) Because of its limited financial resources, UNITAR had to design its programmes and establish processes aiming at achieving concrete objectives.
Some programmes had to be deleted or radically transformed, especially those that appeared obsolete or faced duplication with initiatives conducted by other institutions, within or outside the United Nations system;
(b) Taking into account the growing number of programmes and initiatives in the field of training and capacity-building, within and outside the United Nations system, UNITAR had to organize the restructuring process through the establishment of a flexible administrative framework and the efficiency of its staff;
(c) Flexibility implies no guarantee of job security for the staff.
Not only are the contracts short-term in nature, but they depend on the availability of funds.
Each contract can be terminated upon 30 days' notice, should funds not be available.
Responsibility for fund-raising usually lies with the staff members themselves, meaning that the regime is even more severe than in the private sector.
Each of the main programmes will be briefly described in the present report.
Statistical annexes should concretely illustrate the type and extent of UNITAR activities during the period under review.
Some 228 different programmes have been conducted over the five continents, benefiting 11,170 persons.
The duration of the programmes varies from a couple of days to six months.
The number of individual programmes and participants will certainly be in progressive decline in the years to come.
The development of capacity-building projects will undoubtedly supersede workshops and seminars.
Cooperation with United Nations funds and programmes and specialized agencies has continued to develop.
Very significant progress has been made in the development of joint programmes with the United Nations Office for Project Services and new ventures have been launched with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
Grants have been received from the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships and the Global Environment Facility (GEF).
All programmes in the field of economic and social development training are jointly conceived and conducted, in one way or another, with United Nations bodies, such as the United Nations Office at Geneva (UNOG), the United Nations Office at Vienna (UNOV), the United Nations Office at Nairobi (UNON), the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the United Nations University (UNU).
The cooperation extends to the United Nations system (the International Labour Organization (ILO), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and the World Trade Organization (WTO)) and to other intergovernmental organizations, such as the Organisation for Economic Cooperation in Europe (OECD), the European Union and the International Organization for Migration (IOM).
The recommendation of the Joint Inspection Unit regarding division of labour has been strictly implemented.
This division has been synthesized as follows: The primary responsibility of UNITAR is training and capacity-building for developing countries and personnel of diplomatic missions to the United Nations, while the United Nations Staff College focuses on training for United Nations personnel.
The main areas of responsibility of the United Nations University are research and postgraduate training, as well as strengthening the capacities of higher education institutes in developing countries.
Any research conducted by UNITAR or the United Nations Staff College should be operationally oriented and should enhance their training activities.
With regard to the extension of programmes to other United Nations offices, besides Geneva and New York, regular activities are held in Vienna and Nairobi and meet with success and interest.
Challenges for the future
UNITAR is at the service of Member States.
On the whole, its restructuring process is generally considered to have had positive results, achieved in a relatively short period of time.
UNITAR also has the advantage of working towards specific and quantifiable objectives.
Being totally self-funded, during the recent past UNITAR has proven that it could carve out a specific niche in the field of training and capacity-building, compete with similar government and private institutes in terms of substance, delivery and impact of the programmes and monitor the expansion of its activities.
Compared to the amounts allocated to development cooperation, whether for investments or technical cooperation, the share reserved for training and capacity-building is insignificant.
At UNITAR, roughly one half of the budget is dedicated to capacity-building and the second half to training.
In this respect, the average cost per day and per trainee is less than US$ 10, all included, that is, travel and accommodation of trainees and resource persons, research on methodology, design and distribution of training materials, evaluation and follow-up.
Costs can be maintained at such competitive levels since, as already mentioned, UNITAR can largely rely upon the competencies available, free-of-charge, within the United Nations system.
In resolution 54/229, the General Assembly is very explicit in its call for financial assistance to UNITAR, while recognizing the quality of its recent performance, asking the Member States to consider resuming their voluntary contributions in view of the successful restructuring and revitalization of the Institute.
The results of these renewed calls remain quite modest and somewhat disappointing.
Most of the main contributors that suspended their assistance during the Institute's crisis in the late 1980s have not resumed their contributions, despite the evidence of improved output and the continued relevance of an organ created with the purpose of enhancing the efficiency of the Organization, mainly through training.
Actual and potential donors continue to believe that concrete programmes delivered in a regional or national context are the most effective means to assist capacity-building in developing countries and countries with economies in transition and they follow such a philosophy in their direct bilateral cooperation programmes.
While this is certainly a laudable approach, as an organ of the United Nations, UNITAR has to ensure that the most urgent and relevant demands are answered.
For the fellowship programmes, for instance, the Institute receives 10 nominations for each place available.
If this situation is to improve, the General Fund, made up of non-earmarked contributions, must be strengthened.
This would also allow UNITAR a minimum of flexibility to dedicate time and expertise to preparing proposals for requests which cannot be considered at present.
In 1999, the General Assembly, in paragraph 12 of its resolution 54/229, renewed its call to the Secretary-General to continue to explore all possible ways and means to provide additional facilities to the Institute for maintaining its offices and for conducting programmes and training courses that are provided at no cost to States and to their representatives accredited to United Nations offices in New York, Nairobi, Geneva and Vienna.
Concerns have often been expressed that UNITAR has had to pay rent, maintenance costs, meet expenses within the United Nations premises, etc., while it has been serving all the Member States and, in particular, developing countries and countries with economies in transition, free of charge.
Moreover, since 1993, UNITAR has received no subsidies whatsoever from the regular budget of the United Nations.
Some comments have inferred that this could be interpreted as a possible double charge by the United Nations.
No decision has been taken as yet, although a recent note by the Secretary-General, dated 21 October 1999, on Rental of United Nations premises by the press and other entities (A/C.5/54/25), refers to established policies and shows that institutions with a similar status to that of UNITAR, are accommodated free of charge.
During its thirty-eighth session, held in Geneva from 26 to 28 April 2000, the UNITAR Board of Trustees was of the opinion that in view of the important services that UNITAR offered to the United Nations, appropriate facilities should be provided, at no cost, to the Institute for maintaining its offices and for conducting programmes and training courses in Geneva, Nairobi, New York and Vienna.
The Board expressed the hope that the General Assembly would use more explicit language on this issue.
It further requested the Chairman and the Executive Director to pursue negotiations with the relevant authorities within the United Nations, along the above lines, in order to find a swift solution to this issue, which had been addressed for three years in a row.
In addition, in their last report, the Advisory Committee alluded to the issue, noting that with regard to the implementation of paragraph 12 of General Assembly resolution 53/195 of 15 September 1998, in which the Assembly called upon the Secretary-General to continue to explore all possible ways and means to provide additional facilities to the Institute for maintaining its offices and for conducting programmes and training courses that are provided at no cost to States and to their representatives accredited to United Nations offices in New York, Nairobi, Geneva and Vienna, discussions are ongoing between the Secretariat and UNITAR.
In this connection, the Committee was informed that, if the Institute was given relief on rental and accommodation costs it incurred in New York and Geneva, as is done for some other entities, more resources would be available for General Fund activities.
The Committee requested that the discussions between the Secretariat and the Institute should continue until a solution was found in accordance with the General Assembly resolutions.
During its last session, the UNITAR Board of Trustees underlined the need to be attentive to a proper balance between demand- and donor-driven programmes.
By its heavy reliance on special purpose grants, UNITAR ran the risk of mainly developing activities for which there were funds, at the expense of those which may, at a certain time, be most needed by developing countries.
The Board also recalled the proposal made in the report of the high-level consultant which launched the restructuring process of the Institute (A/46/482, dated 30 September 1991).
Besides the transfer of headquarters from New York to Geneva and the writing off of the UNITAR debt against the appropriation of its building, the consultant proposed that the Institute's programmes be funded through extrabudgetary contributions.
It was proposed that a core funding of around US$ 2,000,000 should, however, be allocated from the regular budget of the United Nations to cover some operations and administrative costs, thus insuring the smooth and long-term continuity of the training and capacity-building activities.
UNITAR has now regained its credibility and the quality and relevance of its programmes are no longer disputed.
Within the ongoing debate on possible new approaches to development financing and, more broadly, on the necessity to identify a new perspective of cooperation for sustainable development, the issue of professional skills is appearing in the forefront.
Taking into account the phenomenon of globalization and considering the constant decrease in the level of official development assistance, the relevance and efficiency of the various infrastructures in the recipient countries are increasingly at stake.
Training, which aims at capacity-building and institution-building will have a major role to play.
Multilateral cooperation, in particular on the part of the United Nations, should represent the cornerstone of this new architecture.
UNITAR has found its place in the context of training and capacity-building for sustainable development.
Report of activities
Training Programme in Multilateral Diplomacy and International Affairs Management
The training activities of the UNITAR Training Programme in Multilateral Diplomacy and International Affairs Management are designed and conducted for junior, mid-level and senior-level diplomats, diplomatic trainees, government officials from specialized ministries, academics and representatives from intergovernmental organizations.
The Programme's training activities can be presented under the five subtitles set out below.
Diplomacy training and fellowships
Training for the diplomatic communities in Geneva, Nairobi and Vienna
These training courses address diplomats at four United Nations headquarters, namely Geneva, Nairobi, New York and Vienna.
Training activities in Nairobi have been conducted since June 1999.
They focus on general, specific and technical aspects which are instrumental for diplomats in accomplishing their professional tasks in a multilateral setting.
Workshops and seminars are offered on: techniques of negotiation and mediation; structure and functioning of the major United Nations organs; drafting of resolutions, trends and challenges in the United Nations system; United Nations conference rules and procedures; structure and retrieval of United Nations documentation; international economics; diplomatic privileges; public speaking; effective presentations; and chairing meetings.
During the period under review, 25 training activities (12 in Geneva, 2 in Nairobi and 11 in Vienna) were conducted under this programme category benefiting 606 trainees.
New York activities are reported separately.
Tailor-made training
UNITAR offers its tailor-made training programmes in multilateral diplomacy and international affairs management to United Nations Member States and international governmental or non-governmental organizations.
Participants learn how to act more efficiently on the multilateral scene, for the benefit of their countries or organizations.
Thus, UNITAR enhances domestic capacities for development in the United Nations Member States.
Countries define their training needs and priorities to UNITAR, which then develops a training curriculum on an individual basis.
The Institute selects trainers and handles all administrative and logistical aspects of the programme.
Lastly, UNITAR carries out the training programme, provides all trainees with background material and evaluates the success of the training project.
Such training can be implemented in Geneva, at other United Nations headquarters or in-country sites.
Between July 1998 and June 2000, the following tailor-made training was conducted for a total of 94 trainees:
(a) Workshop on conference diplomacy and multilateral negotiation, for Italian junior diplomats, conducted in Rome on the request of the Italian Diplomatic Academy;
(b) Seminar on the United Nations system and its reform, for government officers from the Gambia, conducted in Banjul upon the request of UNDP in the Gambia;
(c) Regional international law course for countries from Central Asia and the Middle East, conducted in Tehran by UNITAR, on behalf of the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs.
Fellowship programmes
UNITAR fellowship programmes provide junior to mid-level professionals from United Nations Member States with substantive subject knowledge in the areas of public international law, international affairs management and the international civil service.
As a rule, these training courses last much longer than the aforementioned training programmes, covering periods of three weeks, six weeks and seven months.
They are recurrent, annual programmes and participation is based on a competitive selection process.
Fellowship Programme in International Law, The Hague.
This United Nations/UNITAR training programme for lawyers from developing countries and countries in transition was established under the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Study, Teaching, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law.
A limited number of places is available for lawyers from industrialized countries on a cost-covering basis.
The course covers, inter alia, international criminal law, treaty law, law of the sea, environmental law, humanitarian law, refugee law, human rights, trade law and trade dispute settlement, dispute resolution, negotiation of international legal instruments and international watercourse law.
Fellowship Programme in International Affairs Management, Geneva.
This three-week training programme introduces junior to mid-level diplomats to the multilateral diplomatic work environment.
The fellowships are reserved for trainees from developing countries and countries in transition.
Interested diplomats from industrialized countries may also attend, but must pay a course fee.
The programme covers the United Nations system, United Nations reform proposals, United Nations peacekeeping, preventive diplomacy, multilateral negotiation, dispute settlement, mediation, disarmament, international economic relations, international financial management, international law, public speaking and new communication technologies.
Fellowship Programme on the International Civil Service, Yaoundé, Paris, Geneva.
This seven-month programme is open to trainees from the public and private sectors of French-speaking developing countries.
It is organized with the support of the Agence intergouvernementale de La Francophonie in collaboration with the Cameroon Institute of International Relations and the Paris-based International Institute of Public Administration.
The training comprises four months of instruction followed by a three-month practical internship within a United Nations organization or specialized agency.
The course covers the international civil service, international public administration, international organizations, international law, international economic relations, negotiation techniques and computer and communication skills.
B. Peacemaking and preventive diplomacy
Programme for Briefing and Debriefing Special Representatives and Envoys of the Secretary-General
This programme is designed to preserve and pass on the valuable lessons and experience of special and personal representatives and envoys of the Secretary-General.
Based on in-depth interviews with current and past special representatives of the Secretary-General, a well-organized Handbook for special representatives of the Secretary-General and envoys will be prepared.
Following the debriefing stage, a more systematic briefing programme will be organized for new special representatives of the Secretary-General in close cooperation with the relevant departments in the United Nations Secretariat.
In addition, an annual seminar will be held for special representatives of the Secretary-General so that they can share their experiences with one another and so that problems which recur across missions can be discussed in an ongoing manner.
The project is being funded by the Department for International Development of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade of Canada and the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland.
Fellowship Programme in Peacemaking and Preventive Diplomacy
This yearly programme, which is co-sponsored by UNITAR and the International Peace Academy, offers advanced training in conflict analysis, negotiation and mediation to United Nations staff and diplomats who wish to learn or refine those skills.
The major focus is on the peaceful resolution of disputes through the United Nations.
The two-week training programme is held at the Austrian medieval castle of Burg Schlaining and offers the latest knowledge and experience in conflict resolution through case studies, seminar discussion of obstacles and issues and hands-on practice of negotiation and mediation exercises.
The programme has been supported by the Governments of Austria, Canada, Germany and Sweden, as well as by the Carnegie Corporation of New York, the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation and the McKnight Foundation.
Senior Seminar in Peacemaking and Preventive Diplomacy
The second Senior Seminar, held in Mont Pélerin, Switzerland, was organized in close cooperation with the United Nations Department of Political Affairs and funded by the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland.
The topic selected by the Department of Political Affairs was “The challenge of democratic transition: lessons from past experience for future United Nations peacemaking and peace-building”.
The seminar examined lessons from Cambodia, Bosnia, Guatemala, Mozambique and Tajikistan.  Participants were senior United Nations staff and senior scholars with expertise in this area.
Regional Training Programme to Enhance Conflict Prevention and Peace-building in Southern Africa
Modelled on the above-mentioned Fellowship Programme in Peacemaking and Preventive Diplomacy, this two-week training course is tailored to the pressing needs and challenges of African policy makers in their efforts to assess and respond to conflicts in Africa.
Participants were senior diplomats and military officers from Southern African Development Community (SADC) countries, as well as representatives of civil society groups working in conflict prevention.
The programme was funded by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Denmark and held in cooperation with the SADC Regional Peacekeeping Training Centre in Harare.
It is anticipated that this will become a yearly programme.
A similar meeting is being planned for October 2000 with participants from all parts of Africa.
The meeting will be held at the Gorée Institute in Senegal, and is being funded by the Canadian International Development Agency and the German Federal Office of Foreign Affairs.
Democratic Institutions and Conflict Management in West Africa: A Strategic Workshop for Senior Policy makers
This meeting, held at the Gorée Institute in Senegal, was co-sponsored by the Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance in Sweden and the Organization of African Unity and funded by the Canadian International Development Agency.
The meeting was geared towards senior government officials, such as presidential advisers, government ministers and other senior policy makers from five West African countries.
Senior African scholars addressed issues such as the political and economic causes of conflict, constitutional issues, devolution of power and models of local government, political participation and minority issues, civil-military relations and electoral processes.
The All-Africa Conference on African Principles of Conflict Resolution and Reconciliation
This conference, held in Addis Ababa and funded by the Department for International Development of the United Kingdom, examined the lessons to be learned from indigenous approaches to peacemaking in Africa and provided a forum where views and experiences of African principles of reconciliation were exchanged and discussed by African practitioners, researchers and non-governmental organizations.
Follow-up activities are currently under way to create a network of associations and institutions to carry out implementation of the recommendations of the conference.
Training Programme to Enhance the Conflict Resolution and Peace-building Capacities of Minority and Indigenous Peoples' Representatives
This new programme aims to provide advanced training to key representatives of minority and indigenous peoples in problem-solving approaches to negotiation.
The training is designed to build representatives' capacities to negotiate more effectively with Governments and other dominant groups to have their needs met, while preserving effective working relationships.
The first one-week training course has been funded by the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland and will take place in Geneva in conjunction with the Working Group on Indigenous Peoples.
The second annual one-week training course will take place regionally and plans are under way to hold it at the University for Peace in Costa Rica in December.
C. Programme of Training for the Application of Environmental Law
The UNITAR Programme of Training for the Application of Environmental Law was developed to promote the strengthening of national legal and institutional components for improved environmental management for sustainable development.
It is intended to respond to the needs of developing countries and countries with economies in transition by raising awareness and developing increased knowledge in countries throughout the world about environmental law obligations and opportunities.
The Programme is carried out in partnership with UNEP and with the Commission on Environmental Law of the World Conservation Union and features cooperation with several other partner organizations.
Financial support has been provided by the Governments of Canada, France, Ireland, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands and Switzerland, as well as the United Nations Office for Project Services, UNDP, UNESCO, the World Heritage Convention and the Carl Duisberg Gesellschaft.
Distance learning through courses of correspondence instruction is the central component of the Programme, in order to reach large numbers of people in both government agencies and non-governmental organizations from countries throughout the world.
A series of environmental law training manuals containing material found in no other single source is being produced.
Since 1998, considerable progress has been made in carrying out all aspects of the Programme, most notably, the production of 10 English Language Phase I Courses of Correspondence Instruction.
Attention was given in early 2000 to the production of additional groups of courses dealing with approaches and techniques to meet national implementation requirements for international environmental law provisions.
Comparative law illustrations will be provided in new courses in legal drafting and research for environmental law; legislative tools and measures in environmental law; national regulation of hazardous materials and waste; national legal measures for species, habitats and ecosystems; national legal measures for air, water and soil.
By mid-2000, over 500 participants from 88 countries had followed these courses.
Distance learning instruction is supplemented by specialized inaugural or follow-up workshops held at the national or regional level along with selected intensive efforts for environmental law capacity-building at national level.
Especially noteworthy has been the UNITAR training workshops for the Asia-Pacific region on the implementation of multilateral agreements related to biological diversity, held in 1998 and 1999 at Kushiro, Japan.
Initiatives are now pending for intensive national capacity-building programmes in Bolivia, Côte d'Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Viet Nam and Zambia, as well the continuation of the Kushiro regional training programme and special regional programmes for French-speaking countries.
A training programme related to implementation requirements for the Convention on Biological Diversity and the biosafety protocol is also under preparation.
International migration policy
At the end of June 2000, the International Migration Policy Programme concluded two years of implementation.
Co-sponsored as an inter-agency activity by UNITAR, UNFPA, IOM and ILO, the Programme also works in close cooperation with UNHCR and other global and regional institutions dealing with migration and related aspects.
Its purpose is to strengthen the capacity of Governments in different world regions to manage migration flows at national and regional levels and to foster regional dialogue and cooperation among Governments towards orderly migration.
Meetings are conducted through open and informal discussion among government participants, where general knowledge is combined with review of practical migration topics and hands-on problem solving.
Experts from Governments, intergovernmental institutions, relevant non-governmental organizations and academia act as resource persons.
Shorter follow-up seminars and workshops on specific topics of priority concern are organized in the same regional settings.
Within 18 months, the Programme held four comprehensive capacity-building and regional dialogue meetings, involving close to 220 middle to senior-level government officials from 63 countries, as well as some 65 international experts and resource persons and a large number of representatives of observer Governments and international organizations.
In November 1998, over 40 government officers from 19 central and eastern European countries, the Commonwealth of Independent States and the Baltic States met in Budapest for a first in-depth and practice-oriented training and dialogue exercise, covering essentially all relevant aspects of migration policy and management.
In April 1999, 45 officials from all southern African States met in Pretoria to discuss region-specific migration concerns, define common understandings on how to address these challenges and analyse possible areas of inter-State cooperation.
In November 1999, some 60 officials from 19 countries in South-East Asia and the Pacific gathered in Bangkok for a further major training, capacity-building and regional dialogue exercise, including the review of the practical implications of the April 1999 South-East Asian Migration Symposium.
In May 2000, the Programme organized, in Issyk-Kul (Kyrgyzstan), the International Migration Policy Conference, with 13 countries from central Asia, the Caucasus and neighbouring States, which was attended by close to 70 senior government officials and focused on aspects related to irregular migration and stability in the region.
A key feature of the International Migration Policy Programme is its inter-agency character and the resulting multidisciplinary approach and inter-agency cooperation.
The support and substantive expertise offered by the Programme's partner agencies in the preparation and implementation of its meetings has indeed proven to be a significant asset, ensuring complementarity of action and work programmes that provide Governments with the most comprehensive picture possible on the movement of people today.
Based on two years of experience, and ongoing adjustment in approach and focus, the Programme is seen today as a truly useful mechanism for imparting migration expertise to government migration managers and policy makers.
The Programme's concept is seen as innovative, practice-oriented, and responding to a real need.
Work programmes cover all relevant aspects of migration and human displacement, including migration causes and impacts, global and regional migration policies, principles of migration-related international law, national migration policies, legislation and structures, migration management tools, border control, all aspects of irregular migration (including trafficking and organized crime, detection and removal processes), asylum and refugee protection, gender, human rights, migration and health, etc.
Follow-up seminars in the second half of 2000 and beyond are planned for southern Africa, eastern Europe and central Asia and the Caucasus.
Two major migration policy conferences are also envisaged for the Mediterranean region and for Eastern Africa.
E. Programme of Correspondence Instruction in peacekeeping operations
The UNITAR Programme of Correspondence Instruction has been providing self-paced correspondence courses on United Nations peacekeeping since 1995.
In collaboration with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, this programme ensures that the content of the courses justly reflects accepted United Nations practices and policy.
Each of the eight courses offered covers a different aspect of peacekeeping.
Eleven courses are now in place, all of which are available in English, two in French, three in Spanish and two in German.
During the period from 1 July 1998 to 30 June 2000, the Programme processed 2,197 enrolments in 13 self-paced correspondence courses, with students coming from 63 troop-contributing States.
The individual course titles offered by the Programme to students include the following: Principles for the Conduct of Peace Support Operations (in English or German); Commanding United Nations Peacekeeping Operations: Methods and Techniques for Peacekeeping on the ground (in English or French); Logistical Support of United Nations Peacekeeping Operations (in English or Spanish) Operational Logistical Support of United Nations Peacekeeping; Serving as a United Nations Military Observer: Methods and Procedures (in English or Spanish); History of United Nations Peacekeeping Operations 1945 to 1987; History of United Nations Peacekeeping Operations 1988 to 1997; United Nations Civilian Police: Restoring Order Following Hostilities (in English or Spanish) Peacekeeping Force in the Former Yugoslavia: Dayton to Kosovo (in English or French); Demining in the Aftermath of War: Preventing Casualties among Peacekeepers and the Civilian Population (in English or German); International Humanitarian Law and The Law of War; Global Terrorism; and Peacekeeping and International Conflict Resolution.
New York office
The UNITAR New York office was opened in October 1996, in accordance with various resolutions of the General Assembly and with a decision by the UNITAR Board of Trustees.
Its key mandate is to organize training for delegates in New York and to strengthen the Institute's cooperation with the United Nations Secretariat, programmes and funds, as well as with academia, foundations and the private sector in the Americas.
The office also provides briefs on other UNITAR programmes conducted from its Geneva headquarters.
It furthermore maintains liaison services to another North America-based UNITAR programme, namely, the Programme of Correspondence Instruction in Peacekeeping Operations.
Some highlights of New York office activities
The main operational task of the New York office is the design and conduct of training programmes for permanent missions in New York.
From July 1998 to June 2000, the office conducted some 51 training events, an average of more than two events per month.
Programmes are designed on the basis of the needs and requests formulated by the missions and through regular assessments conducted by UNITAR at the end of each course.
Since July 1998, the UNITAR New York office has trained 1,829 participants, while the range, depth and number of programmes have progressively increased.
In 1999, the Institute offered 26 courses (an increase of 7 new courses over the 19 offered in 1998) and in 2000, it is offering 30 courses.
Some intensive courses, such as the annual Campus on International Trade, provide delegates with a platform from which to undertake more extensive training on themes of particular importance.
The office aims to provide timely training events to contribute to the specific work of delegates in New York, for example, the Workshop on information technology held prior to the 2000 high-level Economic and Social Council session on Information Technology, the Workshop on trade negotiations held before the World Trade Organization (WTO) Ministerial Meeting in Seattle, the Workshops on multilateral environmental negotiations held before the fifth and sixth Conferences of Parties to the Climate Change Convention, etc.
The office has continued with its institutional partnerships with centres of academic excellence, such as the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University and the University of Texas at Austin.
Increasingly, the New York office receives direct requests from permanent missions for additional programmes.
New training events relating to international trade, public-private partnerships, information technology, the work of the Committees of the General Assembly and the work of the Economic and Social Council for new members of the Council have been designed following specific requests from missions.
The office will continue this strategy of flexibility and diversity, while at the same time consolidating the themes and curricula that have proven their relevance to the work of delegates.
Efforts to offer wider access and a strengthened follow-up to each event are ongoing, notably through handbooks and training material, as well as the use of web sites.
Furthermore, efforts to offer “content hours” and “continuing education units” to UNITAR programme participants were initiated in 2000.
The New York office draws its resource persons from a variety of agencies and departments within the United Nations system, as well as from academic institutions, non-governmental organizations and private or public corporations.
The office has a number of joint programmes, which include a series on Sustainable Development in Practice with the United Nations University; a workshop series with the World Bank; an annual week-long Campus on International Trade with the University of Texas at Austin and the World Trade Organization; a series on Multilateral Environmental Negotiations with the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy; a workshop series with the Dag Hammarskjöld Library; a workshop series under a partnership with Seton Hall University; and a workshop series on public-private partnership for sustainable development with the German Management Academy.
Special projects
The conference series aims at bringing together, in an informal, closed-door setting, key actors at the highest level from Governments, the United Nations system, the military, academia and the non-governmental organization community.
Together, they review and debate matters related to peacekeeping, share ideas and offer recommendations to decision-making bodies.
The report (and recommendations) of the conference series are submitted to the Secretary-General and to Member States.
It is also published in book form.
The most recent conference in this series, entitled “The Nexus between Peacekeeping and Peace-building: Debriefing and Lessons Learned”, was held in November 1999.
Conference deliberations were distributed in the form of a “Co-Chairs' Summary” and “Conclusions and Recommendations”.
The conference proceedings are to be published in book form by September 2000.
UNITAR/Consensus Building Institute/Fletcher Series on Consensus Building and Multilateral Negotiation for the Group of 77.
UNITAR and the Consensus Building Institute have been awarded a grant through the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships to assist the countries of the Group of 77 (G-77) in building negotiating capacity.
The Programme is carrying out a series of workshops designed under the guidance of the G-77 leadership and members that address obstacles faced by the G-77 in negotiations, particularly in key areas such as capacity-building, sustainable energy, climate change, biodiversity and trade.
The first two workshops of the series were conducted in March and May 2000.
It is hoped that, in the long run, this forum will become a credible and reliable platform where G-77 countries can improve and refine their negotiating positions.
Training and capacity-building programmes in the field of economic and social development
Training and capacity-building programmes in chemicals and waste management
Training and capacity-building programmes in chemicals and waste management
These programmes support developing countries and countries in economic transition in their efforts to ensure that dangerous chemicals and waste are handled safely without causing harm to human health and the environment.
The programmes are closely linked to the implementation of Agenda 21 and related policy instruments which set out responsibilities of countries vis-à-vis the goal of sustainable development.
As a participating organization in the Inter-Organization Programme for the Sound Management of Chemicals (IOMC), a cooperative agreement among UNEP, FAO, WHO, ILO, UNIDO, UNITAR and OECD, UNITAR contributes its experience in training and capacity-building methodologies, while the Institute's IOMC partners contribute their substantive expertise in specific areas of chemicals and waste management.
Programmes on national integrated management of chemicals
The cross-sectoral nature of chemicals management, and the interests of various government ministries and other stakeholders in this area, require an integrated and coordinated approach at the country level and the development of an organizational framework through which sustained national action in the sound management of chemicals can be ensured.
The following interrelated UNITAR programmes and services are designed to assist countries in systematically addressing this challenge and are closely linked to the various recommendations issued by the Intergovernmental Forum on Chemical Safety (IFCS).
National chemicals management profiles.
The UNITAR/IOMC Programme to Facilitate the Preparation of National Profiles to Assess the National Infrastructure for the Sound Management of Chemicals assists countries in assessing their existing legal, institutional, administrative, and technical infrastructures for the sound management of chemicals, following the UNITAR/IOMC National Profile Guidance Document.
This document, which was developed through pilot projects in four countries, has been endorsed by IFCS.
As of June 2000, the following countries obtained support through the programme: Angola, Argentina, Benin, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, China, Colombia, Côte d'Ivoire, the Czech Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, the Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Guinea, Hungary, Indonesia, Jordan, Lithuania, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mexico, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, the Russian Federation, Senegal, Slovenia, South Africa, Thailand, Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam and Zambia.
National priority-setting workshops.
This Programme addresses the interest of many countries to take a next step following the preparation of a comprehensive national profile, that is, to set priorities for strengthening specific aspects of national chemicals management.
UNITAR has prepared a guidance document on organizing such an event and provides support to interested countries, resources permitting.
By early 2000, some 15 countries had organized a national priority-setting workshop with the support of UNITAR.
National action programmes.
The UNITAR/ IOMC Training and Capacity-Building Programme to Assist Countries in Implementing National Action Programmes for Integrated Chemicals Management supports countries in implementing a formal national process through which technical task forces address national priority issues.
During the reporting period, pilot programmes in Argentina, Ghana, Indonesia and Slovenia were successfully completed.
The UNITAR/ IOMC guidance document, entitled “Planning and Implementing a National Action Programme for Integrated Chemicals Management” served as the key reference for the pilot countries.
Specialized training and capacity-building programmes
UNITAR also conducts programmes on specialized topics of chemicals and waste management.
Taking into consideration experience gained through pilot projects in Chile, Cameroon, the Gambia and the United Republic of Tanzania, UNITAR training activities conducted under this programme promote a general understanding of risk assessment and risk management approaches and are meant to increase familiarity with the various types of resources and expertise needed in this context.
The programme is implemented through country-based projects during which partner countries choose a priority chemical and develop a risk-reduction strategy for it through a process involving all affected and interested parties.
The programme is conducted in cooperation with the International Programme on Chemical Safety.
Pollutant release and transfer registers.
The UNITAR pollutant release and transfer registers Training and Capacity-Building Programme, which is implemented in cooperation with OECD and UNEP Chemicals, assists countries in the design and implementation of national pollutant release and transfer registers through a process involving all interested parties.
UNITAR country-based pollutant release and transfer registers activities have included collaboration with Argentina, Cuba, the Czech Republic, Egypt, Mexico and Slovakia.
At the international level, UNITAR has initiated a Network of Pollutant Release and Transfer Registers Resource Persons through which interested countries will learn about and have better access to related expertise in countries and organizations.
Globally Harmonized System for the Classification and Labelling of Chemicals.
In preparation of the adoption of the Globally Harmonized System for the Classification and Labelling of Chemicals, UNITAR and the International Labour Organization (ILO) agreed in early 2000 to collaborate in developing and implementing a Global Capacity-Building Programme to Assist Countries in implementing the Globally Harmonized System for the Classification and Labelling of Chemicals.
Support activities and services
In order to facilitate access to existing information and experiences and to provide added value to ongoing capacity-building efforts of various actors, UNITAR is conducting the following capacity-building-related support activities and services.
Development of a capacity-building network for the sound management of chemicals.
In 1998, IFCS requested UNITAR to collaborate with countries, international organizations and others, to develop terms of reference for a capacity-building network for the sound management of chemicals.
The objective of the network would be to enhance the exchange of information and experience about capacity-building activities carried out through international organizations, bilateral development cooperation agencies and other groups.
The draft terms of reference for the network was prepared in early 2000 and is to be discussed at Forum III in October 2000 for possible adoption.
Organization of thematic workshops on priority topics of national chemicals management.
UNITAR, together with interested countries and international and non-governmental partners, has organized a series of workshops which addressed national chemicals management capacity-building issues related to: national information systems (September 1998); education and awareness-raising (October 1998); legislation (June 1999); and risk management decision-making for priority chemicals (October 1999).
Library of guidance and training material.
The establishment of a library of guidance and training material relevant to chemicals management capacity-building has been initiated by UNITAR in collaboration with other IOMC participating organizations.
As a starting point for the library, UNITAR, in cooperation with its partners in IOMC, has published a document entitled “Guidance and Training Materials of IOMC Participating Organizations: An Annotated Resource Guide for Chemicals Management Capacity-Building”, which provides references to documents considered to be of particular relevance to country-based capacity-building activities.
National profile home page.
UNITAR and the European Chemicals Bureau of the European Commission have established an Internet-based national profile home page as a means to facilitate worldwide access to national chemical management profiles for the benefit of all interested parties.
National profiles are added at a rate of approximately 20 profiles a year.
A national profile CD-ROM has been published for countries and organizations which lack adequate access to the Internet.
Climate Change Training Programme
The Climate Change Training Programme (CC:Train) was established jointly in 1993 by UNITAR and the Climate Change secretariat in order to address directly the problems faced by developing countries in managing climate change issues.
Since its inception, it has promoted the principle of national implementation, regional support, and global coordination based on its bottom-up strategy.
CC:Train particularly works to enhance human resources through an innovative suite of training programmes.
The underlying principle is to ensure that all capacity-building activities reflect national priorities and initiatives in a cost-effective, customized approach, and to ensure timely delivery of appropriate training and post-training support.
National communications and enabling activities
Country-based training.
The GEF-funded project (Phase II) was successfully concluded in 1999.
At the request of the parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the secretariat, CC:Train will continue to organize training on climate change on a cost-recovery basis to requesting parties even beyond its project life.
A proposal for Phase III is being prepared and will be submitted to fund CC:Train's growing activities and services.
Improving existing training packages and developing new training resources.
A new CD-ROM containing five training packages was released at the fifth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention in Bonn in October 1999.
The CC:Train library of training packages has been used in many other countries by other projects and organizations.
Updates and improvements are planned, as are new training packages covering other areas and tasks.
Delivery of training in countries.
A series of training workshops has recently been implemented in Cambodia, Ethiopia, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Maldives.
Based on discussions with UNEP and UNDP, it is anticipated that more countries will be calling on CC:Train for training.
Climate change certificate programmes
Vulnerability and adaptation certificate course.
In partnership with the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme and the International Global Change Institute, CC:Train has established a four-month university-based certificate course on vulnerability and adaptation assessment.
The course is in a third round and is now implemented by the University of the Pacific for the Pacific Island Countries.
Discussions are under way with the Institute of Ecology of the National Autonomous University of Mexico to expand the course to Central America.
Mitigation analysis certificate course.
Discussions are under way with the Asian Institute of Technology in Bangkok to develop a certification course in mitigation analysis.
Pacific Islands Climate Change Assistance Programme
The Pacific Islands Climate Change Assistance Programme has been very successful and is being presented as a model for future regional programmes on climate change in small island countries.
The first phase was successfully concluded in June 2000.
Results of the project were presented at the Pacific Islands Climate Change Conference held from 3 to 7 April 2000 in the Cook Islands.
The South Pacific Regional Environment Programme and UNITAR, building on their effective partnership, have entered into an agreement to jointly develop phase 2 for GEF and bilateral funding in 2000.
UNITAR will be responsible for developing and implementing mechanisms for a stronger and closer human resource development component in the next phase of the Programme.
Support programme for national inventory systems of parties with economies in transition
Following a regional workshop organized in partnership with the Climate Change secretariat on the new United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change reporting guidelines on annual inventories and options to address challenges of Annex I parties with economies in transition in preparing greenhouse gas inventories, it has been requested that CC:Train develop and implement a multi-year training support programme on inventories for parties with economies in transition.
A proposal was submitted to donors in June 2000.
Implementing facility of the secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
As part of its evolving partnership with the UNFCCC secretariat, UNITAR has been identified as an effective implementing partner for other related activities that the secretariat has planned to outsource.
Following consultations with the G-77 and China, the UNFCCC secretariat and the United Nations Foundation, a pilot programme aimed at strengthening the negotiating capacity of G-77 and China delegates in the Climate Change Negotiations is currently being developed.
UNITAR will build on CC:Train's activities and on the modest United Nations Foundation-funded UNITAR/Consensus Building Institute Capacity-Building Project for G-77 and China.
National Councils for Sustainable Development
In partnership and at the request of the Earth Council, UNITAR has developed a Programme to Support National Councils for Sustainable Development.
This project is currently being finalized and will be submitted to the United Nations Foundation for International Partnerships (Turner Fund) in mid-2000.
Assessing capacity-building needs of developing countries within the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change process
Working together with a group of regional partners, CC:Train has proposed a project to help non-Annex I parties participate in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change process.
In order to achieve this goal, the project will perform a needs assessment among these parties.
Furthermore, the project aims to develop efficient and equitable strategies for delivering capacity-building activities.
C. Information society and development
Centre d'Initiation aux Technologies de l'Information (ICT Training Centre) project
The goal of this project, which was conceived in the Écôle polytechnique of Yaoundé, was to establish a high-level, self-sustained training centre to raise Internet awareness in higher education and enterprises.
It was financially supported by the Infodev programme of the World Bank, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of France.
It can now be said that the objectives of the project have been achieved.
During the project, three public seminars were organized.
The first session trained experts on Network, and the two following sessions trained experts on Internet applications.
By the end of the seminars, a core group of trainers was ready to assume the responsibility for future training in an autonomous manner.
Indeed, a fourth training session was organized, without any help from external parties.
The CD-ROM Internet au Sud is a reference library on Internet and all related issues.
It includes texts, books, training courses, laws, treaties and software.
It is intended to be a self-training and documentary tool on the Internet dealing with: setting up the Internet; using Internet services; the regulatory aspects of Internet; and the economic and social impacts of the Internet.
The French version was published in January 2000.
To date, 7,500 copies have been distributed by partner organizations, such as the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, Agence intergouvernamentale de la Francophonie, FAO, UNESCO, INFODEV (World Bank), the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of France, and UNITAR.
UNITAR has launched a bilingual version (French-English), which will be published by the beginning of 2001.
The project Info-Com Gabon consists of defining a national plan for the entry of Gabon into the information society.
The first step involves the constitution of working groups by sector of activity.
These groups then have to work on the elaboration of a strategy in their respective field of activity.
A training seminar for webmasters took place in March.
A seminar held in April offered the opportunity to compile an assessment report on communication.
A web site on the project is now available and includes a description of the project, as well as all documentation relating to it.
A seminar is scheduled for October, where all the sectoral strategies will be presented.
The last step will consist of defining the global strategy to prepare the entry of Gabon into the information society.
Seminar on Internet governance
A seminar on Internet governance was organized in Antananarivo, in September 1999, with the cooperation and financial support of the Institut francophone des nouvelles technologies d'information et de la formation (INTIF).
This seminar raised issues such as domain name administration at national and international levels.
It aims at preparing executives and representatives from Madagascar to actively participate in negotiations on this topic taking place in regional or international forums.
Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation/International Institute for Public Administration/Institute of International Relations of Cameroon/United Nations Institute for Training and Research Fellowship Programme on International Civil Service
A one-week training programme on new information technologies, web page design and regulatory aspects of Internet was organized as part of the Fellowship Programme on International Civil Service.
Co-sponsored by the Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation, the International Institute for Public Administration, the Institute of International Relations of Cameroon and UNITAR, the Programme is run in cooperation with the International Affairs Management Programme.
International Training Centre for Local Actors: Programme on Decentralized Cooperation and Sustainable Development
The democratization process and the decentralization of power are giving rise to new territorial actors involved in the development of economic activities, social cohesion and quality of life.
These local decision makers are expressing the lack of training and information available in order for them to face their new responsibilities at the fringe of the globalization of environmental and socio-economic problems and the decentralization of decision-making mechanisms.
Following a series of studies, UNITAR, together with the United Nations Office for Project Services, French and Swiss local authorities, non-governmental organizations, universities and representatives of the private sector, have set up a new international programme entitled the International Training Centre for Local Actors: Programme on decentralized cooperation and sustainable development.
This new initiative aims at bridging the existing gaps by proposing, on the one hand, information and training based on partnerships adapted to the challenges of sustainable development and decentralized cooperation and, on the other hand, a platform of meetings and exchanges facilitating cooperation between the United Nations system, Member States, local territories, non-governmental organizations and private companies.
The target group is mainly comprised of elected persons and professional staff from local territorial administrations and those in charge of decentralized cooperation, local decision makers from the private sector and associations seeking a better understanding of international mechanisms.
The programme, led by UNITAR and administrated by the United Nations Office for Project Services, is run in partnership with universities, non-governmental organizations, representatives of private companies, and is supported by local and government authorities.
To date, four seminars have been organized on: sustainable tourism; decentralized cooperation in the framework of sustainable development; Internet services for local authorities and decentralized cooperation; and the role of European regions in decentralized cooperation for the reconstructions of post-crisis situations in the Balkans in general, and in Kosovo in particular.
For the 2001-2003 period, a programme of activities is being prepared in collaboration with all the partners of the programme.
E. Training Programme for the Management of Information and the Mastering of Communication Technologies in the Field of Environment
The numerous past and ongoing national, regional and international environmental programmes have produced considerable quantities of data and information.  This veritable mine of information is, however, difficult to access for a number of technical (incompatibility of format, distance), administrative (barriers between ministries, department, universities, non-governmental organizations) and cultural (the belief that information is power) reasons.
The new information and communication technologies now allow for governance online.
UNITAR, in partnership with the Observatory of the Sahara and Sahel, has conducted promising projects in Africa in this field.
The biennium 1999-2000 has been marked by an increase of training activities for the management of information, the mastering of communication technologies and the development of new operational activities, such as environmental monitoring, disaster prevention, post-conflict or natural disaster reconstruction.
The success of the launching phase of this programme has led to the conception of new initiatives with UNEP, the Global Resource Information Database (GRID), the United Nations Office for Project Services Division for Rehabilitation and Social Sustainability and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU).
Research and development
The conduct of research activities for the development of tools being used in the framework of the programme offers all concerned partners a means to access and exchange all types of information and data.
This exchange builds upon the existing information to create synergies between different initiatives, facilitating further exchange and the establishment of new mechanisms of online governance.
The tools conceived and developed, in collaboration with GRID Geneva, aim at integrating information technologies into platforms where information circulates using web technologies and allowing consultation, updating and distance management of environmental databases.
United Nations inter-agency cooperation
The biennium has been marked by increased cooperation with other UNITAR programmes, including the Programme on the Application of International Environmental Law, the Programme on Information Society and Development and the development of new initiatives with other institutions of the United Nations system.
At the local level.
UNITAR has developed, with the United Nations Office for Project Services Rehabilitation and Social Sustainability Division, in the framework of reconstruction programmes, an environmental information system for area base management in Northern Beeka, Lebanon, with the aim of helping local authorities to formulate, plan and monitor a reconstruction programme.
Thanks to the positive results of this first joint activity, the United Nations Office for Project Services Rehabilitation and Social Sustainability Division and UNITAR will replicate this approach in other areas.
UNITAR has also developed a pilot project with Popular Urban Information Systems in Dakar.
At the national level.
In the context of the implementation of their individual national action programme, and under the auspices of the Observatory of the Sahara and Sahel, Mali, Morocco, Senegal and Tunisia have already created a first version of their Information System for Environmental Follow-up on the Internet (SISEI).
In order to set up its environmental action programme, Benin is also developing an environmental information system on the Internet (EISI), while Burkina Faso, Guinea and Uganda are preparing theirs, thanks to the support of the Observatory of the Sahara and Sahel, UNDP and the International Development Association.
These countries now have a common information tool, useful in addressing cross-cutting communication issues for different conventions (desertification, climate change, biodiversity).
In the framework of its restructuring, the UNEP Infoterra Programme has requested UNITAR to develop national capacities in the field of environmental information systems.
This cooperation will be managed within the EISI programme and will ensure the implementation of future actions at national level.
At the subregional level.
The Solar Energy Research Centre and the Economic Community of West African States (in western Africa) and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (in eastern Africa) are initiating the development of a regional environmental information system on the Internet to assist in the implementation of their Subregional Action Plan.
Northern and southern Africa have expressed similar interest.
The Observatory of the Sahara and Sahel and ITU subregional seminars are scheduled to be held in the near future.
With regard to the Mediterranean basin, UNITAR has assisted the UNEP Blue Plan to develop training capacities for the reinforcement of national statistics offices for the establishment of an environmental information system.
At the regional level.
With the Observatory of the Sahara and Sahel and UNEP GRID Geneva, the creation of an online global information system through the Web is being set up allowing easier access to UNEP GRID data for use by environmental professionals.
At the global level, with UNEP and the United Nations Fund for International Partnership funding, in the framework of the Global Environment Outlook 3, a communication training tool for the exchange and sharing of environmental data and information will progressively be set up in order to ensure a better synergy with different regional collaborative centres throughout the five continents to get a comprehensive synoptic vision of the state of the environment.
Foreign economic relations
UNITAR Training Programmes on Foreign Economic Relations seek to strengthen human resources within public institutions in developing countries and countries with economies in transition in the fields of financial management, trade, and investment.
Training workshops are targeted primarily to senior and middle-level public sector officials involved in managing external debt, negotiating loan and trade agreements, promoting foreign direct investment and facilitating the development of small and medium-sized enterprises.
In recent years, the scope of the programme has been expanded to include private sector entrepreneurs in order to enhance a closer public-private cooperation.
In the reporting period, a total of 855 participants attended UNITAR workshops on foreign economic relations.
Training Programme in International Economic and Financial Relations for the Central Asian Republics and Azerbaijan
During the two years from July 1998 to June 2000, UNITAR conducted 12 training workshops in Central Asia and Azerbaijan.
Workshops were both of a regional and national nature and focused on the three main subject areas of debt management; international trade and customs modernization; and investment promotion and small and medium-sized enterprises development.
Regional workshops were conducted on issues considered relevant for the entire region where individual countries could benefit from discussion and exchange of experiences with neighbouring countries.
National workshops seek to provide a more specific training approach geared to match the specific training needs of public officials within a given country.
Recently, the programme has placed particular emphasis on training in international trade relations and the Multilateral Trading System, as some countries in the region are currently negotiating accession to the World Trade Organization.
Training Programme in Effective Debt Management
Since June 1998, UNITAR, in partnership with UNCTAD and UNDP, organized a series of four training workshops on debt management for Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Making the most of the complementary expertise of each organization, the workshops covered various dimensions of debt management, from the legal to the financial aspects, focusing on operational issues and the development of specific skills for effective debt management.
Fellowship Programme on the Legal Aspects of Debt and Financial Management
The Fellowship Programme, organized jointly with the Irish Institute for Public Administration, was conceived as a regular forum for training debt managers from various sub-Saharan African countries on the legal aspects of debt management.
The two-week programme was initiated in September 1999 and counted on the participation of 23 public officials from 11 African countries.
The structure of the Programme includes three modules: the core programme, comprising lectures on specific technical issues of debt management; the action-oriented modules with practical exercises, case studies and simulation games; and study visits to relevant Irish public sector institutions dealing with debt management.
In a follow-up assessment conducted six months after the Programme, participants unanimously agreed that the Programme had been very beneficial for their daily work showing a clear interest in further training.
Training Programme on Public Administration and Financial Management for the Palestinian Authority
The training programme aims to assist public sector officials from the Palestinian Authority in the development of some of the technical skills required for an efficient public administration.
During the period under consideration, 13 training workshops were conducted largely in cooperation with the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation.
The topics covered included commercial diplomacy (conducted together with UNCTAD), international accounting standards, auditing of public institutions and structure and management of public institutions.
All training programmes have developed a practical approach to training with experienced practitioners as resource persons and the use of case studies and simulation games to provide participants with the opportunity to practice the skills developed.
An external review of Irish Aid involvement with UNITAR concluded that the content of the Fellowship Programme was both “relevant and of high quality”.
In March 2000, an external evaluation commissioned by the donor, the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs, stated that the programme in Central Asia was “of high quality and has yielded a good to very good response” highlighting the practical nature of the workshops.
Training Programme in the Legal Aspects of Debt and Financial Management for Sub-Saharan Africa and Viet Nam
Overview and Background.
The UNITAR Training Programme in the Legal Aspects of Debt and Financial Management has its genesis in a high-level expert meeting held in Geneva in April 1987.
Since then, training and capacity-building initiatives have been undertaken to develop and enhance the skills of government officials (particularly from the Ministries of Finance, Justice, Attorney-General's Chambers, Foreign Affairs, Central Banks and universities) in the legal aspects of debt and financial management.
In this respect, UNITAR has exercised its acknowledged comparative advantage in the design and implementation of regional training programmes (seminars and workshops of short duration) addressed at sensitizing senior government officials and training middle-level officials to various aspects of debt and financial management.
UNITAR conducted six regional workshops for Africa and one national workshop for Viet Nam in the period from 1 January to 30 June 2000.
In addition, relevant training and pedagogical materials will be developed and disseminated widely both in Africa and in Viet Nam.
Sub-Saharan Africa.
In the reporting period, UNITAR conducted 13 regional workshops benefiting 326 government officials from eastern, western and southern African countries.
Training materials were also compiled and distributed as part of each workshop and three documents were published and distributed (an additional three are in print).
The workshop topics included: legal aspects of debt negotiations; legal issues in relation to privatization; legal issues in securities and capital markets; mechanics of loan agreements; debt negotiation workshop: enhancing negotiating capacity of African debt managers; effective national debt management; arbitration and dispute resolution in relation to financial management; workshop for African diplomats on the legal aspects of external debt management and negotiation; legislative drafting (basic and advanced); capital market development and regulation; and negotiation issues in relation to international borrowing.
The hallmark of this period has been the Institution's close collaboration with African regional training institutes.
All workshops conducted by UNITAR have been conducted in conjunction with its partners on a strictly cost-sharing basis and keeping in view the comparative advantage in training of the partners concerned.
The African regional partner training institutes include: the Eastern and Southern African Management Institute (ESAMI, Arusha); the International Law Institute Uganda Legal Centre of Excellence (ILI-Uganda, Kampala); the Macroeconomic and Financial Management Institute (MEFMI, Harare); and the West African Institute for Financial and Economic Management (WAIFEM, Lagos).
Following a needs assessment conducted by UNITAR, during the reporting period, the Institute conducted two national workshops in Hanoi for the Government of Viet Nam.
The results, as reflected in the participant questionnaires, have been extremely positive.
Future national training workshops and dissemination of training materials are planned in the coming months and years.
Main achievements
The main achievements of the programme in the last three years are set out below.
Cooperation, on a cost-sharing basis, with African regional partner institutes.
The programme has developed formal links with four African regional partner institutes (as mentioned above), with a view to greater cost-sharing, complementarity, sharing of expertise and outreach.
UNITAR now acts as a technical partner to those institutes and contributes in joint training activities, as well as in the formulation of annual work programmes of those institutes.
UNITAR also plans on developing ties with other institutes and organizations involved in training and capacity-building for the African subregion.
Completion of a record number of training activities.
For the period from January 1998 to December 2000, the programme will have completed 20 workshops in both sub-Saharan Africa (17) and Viet Nam (3).
To a large extent, this success is owing to the Institute's excellent relations with its African regional partner institutes.
Of the total of 20 workshops, 17 were regional workshops to which government officials from several countries were invited, and 16 were jointly organized (on a cost-sharing basis) with a partner.
Increased involvement of African experts.
UNITAR has systematically identified and involved, as consultants, African experts in various areas of debt and financial management in its training activities.
By way of example, of the 50 resource persons who conducted workshops, 35 were African nationals.
African experts have also increasingly contributed to the publications of the programme.
South-South cooperation.
UNITAR experience and work in different regions has also led to a certain South-South collaboration.
For example, UNITAR has brought experts from central and eastern Europe to speak in Africa, and from Africa to speak in Viet Nam.
This has been assessed by the stakeholders as a very positive way of sharing experiences and best practices.
Cost savings in programme management.
The programme has managed to fulfil its mandate over the last three years with only one full-time regular staff member and a part-time secretary.
Considerable cost savings have been achieved in this regard.
Development of a capacity-building concept.
In parallel to its regular training activities, the programme has developed and implemented a capacity-building concept in the form of developing a guidance document for partner countries, with a view to compiling national profiles in assessing the national legal infrastructure in relation to financial management.
The next programme phase will see the development of these profiles in east, west and southern Africa.
Development and dissemination of training materials and documents.
UNITAR has considerably expanded the development and dissemination of documentation to relevant government offices (in sub-Saharan Africa and Viet Nam) in areas relating to the legal aspects of debt and financial management.
In this regard, libraries and documentation centres in Africa have been supplied with all documentation developed at UNITAR.
The core text of the report has been drafted in as succinct a manner as possible.
The following annexes aim to illustrate the main achievements.
Annex I Members of the Board of Trustees
Annex II General reflection on training, capacity-building and the state of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
Annex IV Statistics on participation by country, showing that UNITAR offerings are of interest to all Member States of the United Nations, both developing and industrializing countries
Annex V Statistics on participation by regional grouping, following the traditional United Nations geographical distribution
Annex VI Publications and training material, which is not a list of available publications, but rather a list of materials published during the period under review and of pedagogical materials distributed as supports to training activities
Annex VII Selected financial aspects, which is obviously not a report or financial statement prepared by the United Nations Board of Auditors, but rather the presentation of three selected aspects, namely: list of contributors to the General Fund and the Special Purpose Grants Fund and statement of income and expenditure for the biennium 1998-1999
Annex I
Members of the Board of Trustees
“The Board shall:
(a) Formulate principles and policies to govern the activities and operations of the Institute;
(b) Establish conditions and procedures for:
(i) The utilization of funds from the General Fund and
(ii) The receipt and disbursement of special purpose grants
January 1998 to December 2000
January 1996 to December 1998 and January 1999 to December 2001
January 1999 to December 2001
January 2000 to December 2002
The President of the General Assembly
The President of the Economic and Social Council
General reflections on training, capacity-building and the state of the United Nations Institute of Training and Research
In this context, the Executive Director and the programme coordinators of UNITAR have put the present reflections on paper.
It should be generic enough to retain the attention of non-specialists and substantial enough to be of interest to training specialists.
In its capacity as training institute of the Organization and considering the growing importance of capacity-building in the new development cooperation approach, UNITAR believes that its contribution, albeit modest, can be of some value.
A non-bureaucratic approach to management
The UNITAR restructuring process is considered to have had positive results, achieved in a relatively short period of time.
UNITAR has the advantage of working towards specific and quantifiable objectives.
Its management is based on the “three Ps” model: purpose, process and people.
This means that staff share common objectives but bear individual responsibility for the continuation of their projects; they have scope for creativity but no guarantee of job security.
On the other hand, the design of programmes directed towards concrete objectives means that the special purpose grant accounts are strong and prosperous, while the General Fund, fed by non-earmarked voluntary contributions, remains fragile.
The Institute's successful restructuring is very specific to it and cannot necessarily be replicated in other contexts.
The relatively small size of UNITAR has facilitated the design and conduct of numerous activities with the programme coordinators being given broad scope for initiative.
The decentralization of responsibilities led to decentralized management.
The role and task of the leadership is more of guidance than of daily management.
Each programme coordinator and their colleagues face opportunities and challenges.
They must, however, set realistic goals in order to maintain motivation and team spirit.
Participation, consultation and open communication allow broad and effective decentralization.
This implies that confidence and informality supersede close or permanent supervision.
A hierarchy certainly remains and is sometimes asserted, but in a new and totally different perspective.
It ceases to be an end in itself, as is often the case in public bureaucracy, and becomes a tool of management, where those responsible, at every level of the programmes, are answerable for their decisions and deeds.
Management practice at UNITAR has evolved during the restructuring phase, moving from “management by crisis” (i.e. management and strategy formulation as events occur without any long-sighted policy) to a management methodology that combines three key elements: policy (in the sense of priority-setting), administration (structure and content of the programmes) and personnel.
Obviously, the administrative and financial restructuring of UNITAR had to be achieved in conjunction with an in-depth reflection on the best possible ways to implement the Institute's mandate.
An excellent rapport between the Board of Trustees and the staff of UNITAR has facilitated the emergence of a vision and a direction for the Institute, while keeping in view the priority needs of Member States.
A common approach of sorts to training has been identified.
The whole development of training and capacity-building activities has been based on projects.
If the Institute's recent past can be considered a success, the main reason is undoubtedly that it has delivered the goods.
The projects have been implemented punctually and following their terms of reference.
All stakeholders and partners have been kept informed in a direct and transparent manner.
Evaluations have been conducted and results disseminated.
Precise, timely and professional delivery can thus be considered as one of the major characteristics of UNITAR programmes.
A specific approach to training
Training is not synonymous with education.
Indeed, the two concepts are quite different.
It would be interesting to go back to the roots of the terms and analyse them individually.
Etymology can be useful in obtaining the sense of a term even if it has evolved from its original meaning.
Education (in Latin, educare, from ex-ducere) means to bring up or, more precisely, to lead out.
Knowledge has become an individualistic and almost mystical concept of the improvement of the self.
Training (from the Latin trahere or tragere) means to pull or to draw in a collective sense, with the implication of discipline, to draw in order to be in a line (as in a train of wagons). Interestingly enough, formation (in French, from morphe in Greek and forma in Latin) has an identical sense of collective discipline, meaning to shape or to bring into proper form in order to fit into a larger unit.
Education ensures continuity of values and transmission of knowledge, while training lays the groundwork for innovation and the improvement of institutions through enhanced individual skills.
The rapid evolution of techniques and social transformations are leaving certain areas of competence obsolete at a rate unknown in the past.
The interrelationship between education, training and capacity-building is close-knit and complex.
A sound basic education lays a good foundation for the assimilation of new skills following a training policy which encourages flexibility and imagination.
In the modern climate of change, a new mentality is imperative and institutional rigidity must be confronted.
The practical solutions which had been successful in a less complex and more stable world must be revisited.
The Institute's initiatives are based on the conviction that training must be designed in the light of clearly identified needs and be implemented creatively and imaginatively to counteract the grind of routine, inherent to any pedagogical undertaking.
A good strategy takes into account two requirements at different levels, namely, to acquaint the trainees with their own needs and the needs of the institution in which they serve and to define a credible project for their own professional careers and the ultimate strengthening of their national institution.
This should lead to greater individual motivation and increased support from decision makers.
The main difficulty and, often, source of discouragement arises from the polarization between institutional inertia and the requests of an ever-accelerating society adapting itself to the globalization of issues.
Good training can progressively counter the reluctance to change which precedes rapid evolution of society and technology.
Training is a precondition for professional integration which is, for its part, a prerequisite to sustainable development.
At a time when many are rethinking the modalities of development cooperation and considering that the post-industrial socio-economic system demands new specializations and qualifications, the question arises as to whether the system of learning can be a factor to facilitate change rather than remaining an end in itself.
Indeed, competencies are often more sought after than qualifications, at least in highly industrialized countries.
In many developing countries, however, academic diplomas, particularly from foreign universities, continue to facilitate access to higher professional posts and ensure greater mobility.
In the post-industrial society, concrete professional experience and track records tend to be given as much emphasis as academic certificates.
The number of students at universities has ceased to be an indicator of the quality of any society.
The pitfalls of “on-line training”
Every training endeavour must face an imbalance between the transmission of theoretical thought and the awareness of the concrete practicalities of societies in rapid economic and social change.
To keep pace with these transformations, new pedagogical methodologies must be introduced, including distance learning and computer-assisted teaching.
As such, these new technologies are not a cure-all and would never fully replace the individual exchange between the trainees and the trainers.
However, they pose real questions as to training techniques and, thus, impose a renewed obligation to be ever more imaginative and to expand knowledge.
Further to the recommendations of the General Assembly and following the guidance of the Board of Trustees, UNITAR has ceased to conduct any research per se.
The research activities which exist are geared to improve training, in both its substance and methodology.
A considerable amount of research was carried out during the period under review, resulting in the publication of books and occasional papers, guidance documents and training kits.
UNITAR has, of course, also started the preparation and diffusion of electronic training material.
Three CD-ROMs have been produced and are available on the UNITAR web site: “Internet au Sud” — a type of reference library, SISEI — the French acronym for Information System for Environmental Follow-up on the Internet, and “Training and Workshop Resources” — dealing with the implementation of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and contain two series of training materials, Policy Development and Technical Studies.
These electronic materials are mainly training supports.
UNITAR is considering the gradual introduction of “on-line training”, parallel to its ongoing correspondence instruction courses.
However, thought must be given to both the content and the methodology.
It should first be ascertained that the cadre of developing countries will have access to the material and if they will have the necessary time to follow the training programmes.
Official validation, by means of tests or exams, must be put in place.
At present, there are very few convincing examples on the market.
Capacity-building: a concept to be handled with care
The ultimate goal of staff training is institution-building.
The generic expression of “capacity-building” has become a catchword in recent years.
As with many terms born of the politics of development assistance, it coins a rather vague concept which could have many potential meanings.
The term is sometimes used to denote an activity and is often found listed together with other actions, such as training and education.
More recently, it has come to denote the need for a new approach to development cooperation.
This new approach would be centred on the concept of strengthening national human and institutional capacity, rather than direct technical assistance or traditional development cooperation methods.
Viewed in this manner, capacity-building is no more or less than the development of the ability to decide and to implement — in a word, to govern, or to use more modern terminology, to manage.
A much deeper reflection is needed.
It is not an iconoclasm to say that a new elite of international experts on “capacity-building” is emerging and leaving its mark on a range of activities from workshops to colloquia, from consultancies to field operations.
There is a real danger of losing sight of the existing capacities in developing countries, countries in transition and even countries in post-conflict rehabilitation.
Do foreign-driven capacity operations, implemented by numerous expatriates, strengthen or undermine the civil society which otherwise could have developed as a “parallel society” or even a “counter-society”?
The imperative need for capacity-building is sometimes more obvious to donors than to recipients.
The relevance and vigour of existing institutions must be evaluated and recognized case by case.
In the absence of such an assessment, limited new capacities may be built while many valuable existing capacities could well be destroyed.
Of course, UNITAR has no way of imposing any sort of agenda, owing to its small size, but remains keen to encourage local initiatives and has developed new methodologies to meet those needs.
Institution-building must thus acknowledge the existing capacities and look for the largest possible involvement of stakeholders, firstly in the countries and secondly within the communities of development agencies.
In this respect, a few years ago UNITAR developed the concept of “National Profile” which has since been introduced in various training and capacity- building programmes and improved in the light of experience.
This concept is articulated around three main axes, as follows:
(a) Strategic planning for assessing priorities and capacity-building lies with the national authorities which are best placed to evaluate their needs and identify the relevant plans of action;
(b) A “country team” is established, gathering all stakeholders directly concerned, in order to prepare a “National Profile” assessing the infrastructure necessary for a good management of the issue at stake;
(c) UNITAR provides practical guidelines and expert support to the team, which facilitates integrated approaches at both the national and regional levels.
Contracts are established and cooperation sought with international and intergovernmental institutions within and outside the United Nations system, as well as with non-governmental organizations, in order to mobilize a maximum of expertise.
From the National Profile assessment of the infrastructure, some salient features appear.
UNITAR helps in organizing workshops for the setting of national priorities.
Since these priorities are often common, mutatis mutandis, to several countries, “thematic seminars” can be held at the regional level.
Once the priorities have been set and the necessary human and material resources gathered, UNITAR assists the country teams to design and implement a National Action Plan, which is comprehensive and integrated.
The concept of “National Profile” is relevant for capacity-building and institution-building when several different governmental and non-governmental parties are concerned.
It has been introduced by UNITAR in its programmes on the management of chemicals and waste, financial management, various aspects of environmental management training and, recently, in disaster prevention, mitigation and management training.
Modest costs but insufficient means
The market of skills strengthening, transfer of techniques and management improvement is highly competitive and often costly.
Funding is difficult to secure, since the concrete results of training civil servants are not easily measured and do not lead to the production of tradable wealth.
This partly explains why reserves for training in public development assistance remain minuscule.
Private investors seem more inclined to finance training activities, aware of the fact that the better their local staff in developing countries are trained, the better they will meet the new challenges and constraints that arise.
The cost of training also derives from the complexity of contemporary issues.
The development of any project implies the involvement of several professional trainers, with different skills and know-how.
This means an active pedagogy which requires greater motivation and responsibility on the part of both instructors and trainees.
Although there are no existing fail-safe methods, it may be said that the United Nations enjoys an important comparative advantage, considering the diversity of competencies available within a multicultural context.
Through exchange and partnership, countries can identify their own methods, taking inspiration from the better practices of others.
Moreover, imagination and flexibility are much enhanced when a strict intellectual framework is adopted, including development of the training curriculum, renewal of methodologies, updating of pedagogical materials, setting research priorities, choosing validation criteria and regular evaluation of the programmes.
Well-placed investment in training activities is crucial to any strategy for sustainable development.
Looking ahead
In conclusion, it may be useful to recall that, within the new framework of international cooperation, the importance of the training component in the development process has increased.
Requests from developing countries and countries with economies in transition are increasing.
Simultaneously, the diminishing official development assistance pushes some agencies, both within and outside the United Nations system, to turn from major development programmes to training and capacity-building exercises.
The survey conducted by UNITAR on training institutions and programmes in the Organization and the comments made thereon by the Secretary-General (A/54/480) have illustrated the multiplication of initiatives.
In its report on UNITAR, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions alluded to the proliferation of training programmes within the Organization.
Without making any judgement on the quality of ongoing initiatives, there is a danger that one of the increasingly important tasks of the United Nations, namely, training, will once again become an operation of mere brokerage, designed by departments or units having little pedagogical experience, lacking substantial knowledge and having limited funding.
This, in turn, could lead to superficial undertakings, conducted through outside experts recruited from academia in industrialized countries for one-off workshops or seminars.
UNITAR does not enjoy any sort of exclusivity status.  However, the conceptual framework which it has designed and the recent positive results it has obtained can be of use to the United Nations as a whole and its Member States, whether they are recipients or donors.
UNITAR avoids, as far as possible, the known weaknesses of capacity-building operations, leaving the choice of priorities to the authorities concerned in each country.
In being directly involved in the conceptualization and conduct of the programme, the various stakeholders have some sense of ownership.
Generally, the donors do not place any specific conditions on the conduct of the programmes.
They usually request regular reports and occasionally carry out their own evaluation of the concrete impact of the operations and do not exert any direct control over the programme management.
In recent years, the Institute's training and capacity-building programmes have been designed following a new perspective based upon and coupled with some simple principles of new public management theories.
The programmes have been adapted to better answer the needs of the beneficiaries.
The diplomacy training programmes, as old as UNITAR itself, have evolved and expanded to International Affairs Management training, including new issues such as preventive diplomacy and peacemaking, as well as international migration.
As a follow-up to the Earth Summit, UNITAR has designed and conducted programmes to ease the implementation of the new international legal instruments dealing with the environment, in particular in the area of climate change.
Programmes are developing in parallel to ongoing negotiations, such as on chemicals, waste and pollutants.
New trends in debt and financial management, including the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative, have been integrated into the curricula.
Recent international issues, such as the information society or decentralized cooperation are being progressively introduced in the global programme of UNITAR.
These different undertakings have been briefly reported in the preceding pages.
Annex III
Chronological list of training activities  1 July 1998 to 30 June 2000
For the sake of brevity, every programme event is not mentioned or described in the core text of the report of activities.
This chronological table aims at showing, in a rather comprehensive way, the scope of UNITAR training and capacity-building activities and its geographical extent.
Some programmes have been recently developed in other languages, usually by means of simultaneous interpretation.
To be consistent and coherent, the programmes are listed in English and French only.
Mention is made if a translation was made, partial or complete, into Arabic, Russian and Spanish.
Chronological list of UNITAR training activities
Annex IV
Statistics on participation by country
Annex V
Statistics on participation by regional grouping
Annex VI
Publications and training material
With the restructuring of UNITAR and following the decision of the General Assembly, activities of research per se have been discontinued, in favour of research on and for training.
UNITAR publications are thus either practice-oriented books or manuals and training materials.
Only publications written or directed by UNITAR staff are mentioned here, together with genuine UNITAR training materials published by the various programmes.
Most of the publications are edited and distributed through commercial channels.
This guarantees a good level of scientific credibility, since it must meet market-based competition but in turn, and unfortunately, makes the publications rather expensive.
Specific arrangements are made with the publisher(s) to have systematic discounts in favour of developing countries or to have a special discount, for a short period, by ordering through UNITAR.
London: Ashgate, pp. 265-281 (1998)
PECK, Connie: Organizations and Cooperation in Conflict Prevention: Strategic Management and Coordination.
In J. Ginifer, E.B. Eide and C. Ronnfeldt (Eds.) Preventive Action in Theory and Practice.
Oslo, Norway: The Norwegian Institute of International Affairs, pp. 105-131.
Tokyo: UNU Press, pp. 427-444.
In M. Mekenkamp, P. van Tongeren and H. Van de Venn (Eds.) Searching for Peace in Africa: An Overview of Conflict Prevention and Management Activities.
The Hague, The Netherlands: European Platform for Conflict Prevention, pp. 39-44.
115 pages plus students are provided a copy of The Blue Helmets — available in English, Course Author: F.  Liu, Former UN Assistant Secretary General For Special Political Affairs
Course Authors: Mr. Gerhard Bornmann, Formerly UN Dept. Of Humanitarian Affairs Demining, and COL Barry Cox, UK Army, retired
• UTA/UNITAR Campus on International Trade, in cooperation with the World Trade Organization, June 1998, 64 pages; June 1999, 57 pages; and June 2000.  Note
Annex VII
Selected financial aspects
Article VIII of the statute of UNITAR reads as follows:
“The financing of the Institute's training programmes shall be in accordance with the following principles:
(a) The core training programme, concentrating on training for international cooperation and multilateral diplomacy at all levels, primarily of persons from developing countries, shall be financed from the General Fund;
(b) Other training programmes, designed and conducted by the Institute for other United Nations bodies and specialized agencies, shall be carried out on a fully reimbursable basis, without resulting in any financial obligations for the General Fund;
“Funds administered by and for the Institute shall, as provided in the United Nations Financial Regulations, be subject to audit by the United Nations Board of Auditors ” (para.
The report of the United Nations Board of Auditors (1998-1999)a will be submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty fifth session.
Three selected aspects are herewith presented:
Contributions to  (a) The General Fund;
(b) Contributions to the Special Purpose Grants Fund, informing readers of the report of activities and paying tribute to those contributing States, intergovernmental organizations and private institutions which have assisted UNITAR financially during the period under review;
(c) The statement of income and expenditure for the biennium 1998-1999, demonstrating that the budget for those years has remained balanced.
Voluntary contributors to the General Fund (by decreasing importance of contributions)  List of donors to the Special Purpose Grants Fund
(July 1998 to 30 June 2000, in United States dollars, unless indicated otherwise)
UN/UNITAR Fellowship Programme in International Law
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs 1998 $ 193 500
Fellowship Programme on the International Civil Service
Agence intergouvernementale de la Francophonie 1999 $ 970 000
2000 $ 199 326  Carnegie Corporation of New York $ 75 000
The McKnight Foundation $ 60 000
The Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade of Canada
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark $ 56 300
The Federal Foreign Office of Germany
1999 Fellowship Programme $ 24 691  SRSG Project $ 75 000
The above list refers to cash contributions only.
Contributions in kind, such as free services, resource persons, provision of free conference/meeting facilities, covering of travel and accommodation costs, etc., are not taken into account in the present list.
As a breakdown example, the training programmes within the debt, economic, financial management and public administration programme are financed 50 per cent by SDC, 30 per cent by African regional institutes and 20 per cent by partner Governments.
United Nations Institute for Training and Research
Statement of income and expenditure and changes in reserve and fund balances for the biennium 1998-1999 as at 31 December 1999  (Expressed in United States dollars)
a Comparative figures reclassified to present reporting on a biennium basis.  b See Schedule 1.1.
In accordance with Article VIII, para.  3 of the revised Statute of UNITAR (A/43/697/Add.1), only paid-in contributions are included in the current year income.
c For details by project, see Statement V.  Includes contributions in kind valued at US$ 2,000 which was received from the Government of Japan during 1998 for project — CC:Train Programme — Phase II.  a Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth session, Supplement No.  5D (A/55/5/Add.4).
Letter dated 4 December 2000 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to resolution 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000, in paragraph 14 of which the Security Council expressed the view that the Governments of Uganda and Rwanda should make reparations for the loss of life and the property damage they had inflicted on the civilian population in Kisangani, Democratic Republic of the Congo, and requested me to submit an assessment of the damage.
Accordingly, as I noted in my fourth report to the Council on the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) (S/2000/888, para.
20), I sent a mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 13 to 23 August to assess the loss of life and property damage inflicted on Kisangani as a result of the fighting between Uganda and Rwanda in June 2000.
The mission was led by Omar Bakhet of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and comprised staff from UNDP, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and was accompanied to Kisangani by officials of the International Labour Organization and MONUC.
The report, which is contained in the annex to this letter, describes the findings of the team concerning the events in Kisangani, including the fighting which broke out between Ugandan and Rwandan troops in June 2000 and its effects on the population and the infrastructure of the city.
It also describes the immediate reaction of the international community, including the humanitarian agencies.
According to the report, over 760 civilians were killed and an estimated 1,700 wounded.
More than 4,000 houses were partially damaged, destroyed or made uninhabitable.
Sixty-nine schools were shelled, and other public buildings were badly damaged.
Medical facilities and the cathedral were also damaged during the shelling, and 65,000 residents were forced to flee the fighting and seek refuge in nearby forests.
The report contains a number of recommendations, primarily relating to the need for additional humanitarian assistance and rehabilitation.
I have recommended the implementation to the agencies concerned accordingly.
I should be grateful if you would have this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A.  Annan
Annex
Report of the inter-agency assessment mission to Kisangani  (Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1304 (2000), paragraph 14)
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1304 (2000), paragraph 14, the Secretary-General dispatched a multi-disciplinary inter-agency team to assess the loss of life and the property damage inflicted on the civilian population in Kisangani, Democratic Republic of the Congo, during the fighting between Ugandan and Rwandan troops which took place from 5 to 11 June 2000.
The issue of the reparations for the loss of life and property damage to be made by the Governments of Rwanda and Uganda stated in paragraph 14 of the resolution was outside the terms of reference of this mission.  The mission was carried out from 13 to 24 August 2000.
The terms of reference for the mission are set out in the appendix.
Mission members were selected following consultation with the concerned departments and agencies and were as follows: Omar Bakhet, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) (mission leader); Joe Comerford, UNDP; Jamie McGoldrick, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; Frank Sutmuller, consultant; Simon Yazgi, Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The mission was accompanied to Kisangani by Lambert Gbossa, International Labour Organization (ILO) and Alan Lindquist, United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
The Kisangani evaluation mission formed two teams from Geneva and New York, leaving on 13 and 15 August, respectively, Mr. Comerford and Mr. Sutmuller having travelled from Geneva.
The two teams were due to meet in Kisangani on 19 August 2000, but this did not happen owing to the death of Joe Comerford (of the advance team) in Kisangani.
The work of the advance team, to assess structural damage, was halted and the remaining team member was evacuated.
Difficulties with flight clearances also delayed the New York team's arrival in Kisangani until 22 August.
The current system for flight clearance involves submitting requests at least 48 hours in advance through the Commissaire général, Chargé des affaires de la MONUC.
Humanitarian and MONUC flights returning to Kinshasa from rebel-held areas have up until now been required by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to transit via another country, thus increasing costs and delays.
The mission reorganized its plans and continued with its investigations.
An assessment of structural damage was carried out but it requires expert follow-up to complete the financial costings.
The information gathered and assessments made from those investigations have allowed the mission to conclude its preliminary analysis and recommendations.
During its visit the mission met with the Minister of Health of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; the Commissaire général, Chargé des affaires de la MONUC; Ambassador Kamel Morjane, Special Representative of the Secretary-General; Bouri Sanhouidi, United Nations Resident Coordinator; MONUC; heads and members of all United Nations organizations and bodies active in the country (Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNDP, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), World Food Programme (WFP), World Health Organization (WHO), ILO, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)) and more specifically in Kisangani (Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, FAO, UNICEF, MONUC, WHO, WFP); local administrations; international and local non-governmental organizations; civil society members; and representatives of the foreign diplomatic corps in Kinshasa.
Access to government sources was affected by two major events that coincided with the mission's visit to Kinshasa: the funeral of a Vice Minister of Finance and the opening of the Constituent Assembly in Lubumbashi meant that many of the Ministers with whom the mission had expected to meet were unavailable.
In the week before the full team's arrival United Nations agencies, MONUC, local administration and international and local non-governmental organizations undertook a considerable amount of preparatory work that contributed to the investigations of the mission.
The preparation allowed the mission to focus its work once in the city and make optimal use of the time on the ground.
As a result, and despite the constraints, the mission was able to form what it believes is an accurate description of the situation in Kisangani.
The mission wishes to express its gratitude to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Kamel Morjane; MONUC staff both in Kinshasa and Kisangani; the Resident Coordinator, Bouri Sanhouidi, and the United Nations country team; Congolese officials; non-governmental organizations; and diplomats who met with the mission, and in particular to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, whose in-country facilitation and expertise was invaluable.
Summary
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is in the throes of a deepening crisis that has, so far, eluded all political and military attempts to solve it.
Decades of political and economic mismanagement have resulted in widespread poverty, poor infrastructure and weak and ineffective governmental institutions.
The paradox is that these negative development trends are occurring in a country that has immense natural resources.
This situation is exacerbated by the direct consequences of a pernicious conflict that has been widely described as “Africa's First World War”.
As a consequence the country's economy is marked by high unemployment, shrinking production, rampant inflation and monetary instability.
The escalating public finance deficit is currently being met by increasing the already heavy foreign debt.
Schools and hospitals lack resources and staff, civil servants' salaries have not been paid for many years, and support for basic welfare services is being provided mainly by international aid agencies and hundreds of indigenous humanitarian and church organizations.
The recent war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has involved seven neighbouring countries, intensifying the country's already critical socio-economic and political situation.
According to the United Nations mid-term review issued in August, this situation has resulted in a major humanitarian crisis currently affecting over 20 million people, including 1.8 million internally displaced people and over 400,000 refugees.
Observers suggest the current situation in the country may have serious repercussions on the stability of the entire central African region.
The city of Kisangani is one of the worst casualties of the most complex war in Africa.
As in the rest of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, life expectancy is low and infant mortality rates are high.
Access to basic health and welfare services is markedly less than the regional average.
Infrastructure is crumbling and much of the country is cut off because of a lack of transport.
Preliminary results from recent household surveys in urban areas commissioned by the United Nations indicate poverty and vulnerability to be commonplace.
On 5 June, persisting tensions in Kisangani between the occupying forces of Uganda and Rwanda erupted into open and violent conflict, with fighting spreading into residential areas and indiscriminate shelling occurring for 6 days.
It was the third and by far the most brutal clash between the two armies battling to control the city, for reasons their leaders could never adequately explain.
This has led some observers to suspect that an underlying cause was control of the lucrative diamond industry.
Over 760 civilians were killed, and an estimated 1,700 wounded.
More than 4,000 houses were partially damaged, destroyed or made uninhabitable.
Sixty-nine schools were shelled, and other public buildings were badly damaged.
Medical facilities and the cathedral were also damaged during the shelling, and 65,000 residents were forced to flee the fighting and seek refuge in nearby forests.
The conflict has intensified the pressure on an already fragile and neglected infrastructure, increasing the hardship faced by the population of Kisangani.
The health centres, already under-equipped and under-funded, have had to cope with the new influx of victims.
Transport infrastructure was badly damaged, such as the vital bridge over the Tshopo River that is now in an advanced state of disrepair through over-use by retreating troops and their heavy military trucks and equipment.
Landmines were also laid by retreating forces on the bridge and along major routes.
Beyond the physical damage, the psychological trauma inflicted on the civilian population by the outbreak of hostilities in Kisangani was immeasurable.
Systematic violations of international humanitarian law and indiscriminate attacks on civilians have left residents highly traumatized.
Hostilities in June made civilians in Kisangani realize that they were unprotected against such attacks and ill-prepared for the consequences, with very few contingency food items to sustain them through the crisis.
The international humanitarian community and its national counterparts mounted an emergency response in the city and surrounding areas.
Over 240 tons of relief supplies were airlifted from Kinshasa, Goma and Lubumbashi by the United Nations and international non-governmental organizations.
Food and non-food relief items were distributed to the internally displaced persons and affected residents.
Congolese medical specialists including surgeons were flown in from the capital to treat the large number of war wounded.
While there are some signs that normal life is resuming in the city, large-scale reconstruction of homes and public buildings will be needed before the internally displaced population is confident enough to return to the community.
However, it is the uncertain security environment that remains the main obstacle preventing people from resettling into their communities.
While humanitarian assistance saves lives and offers grounds for the introduction of confidence-building measures among communities, these interventions are unsustainable.
Given the massive logistical and operational costs involved in delivering such assistance by air to locations such as Kisangani and in order to break the cycle of dependency and rebuild self-reliance, rehabilitation support programmes must be implemented.
Kisangani offers an opportunity to undertake a series of quick-impact projects to rebuild people's traditional capacities and self-sufficiency in the affected communities.
The international donor community must be ready to fund initiatives that stimulate agricultural production and encourage commercial activity through distribution of seeds and tools, food aid programmes supporting public sector staff and their families, and small farmer and microcredit schemes.
Such programmes should be targeted so as to meet immediate needs and address the underlying issues of poverty and vulnerability while supporting the peace process.
Recommendations
Given the precarious security situation in the country, in Kisangani in particular, urgent efforts should be made to strengthen field security in order to provide a safer working environment for all United Nations and international humanitarian workers on the ground, and in line with the recommendations of the recent mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo of the United Nations Security Coordinator.
The search for peace is not dependent on political negotiations alone.
The United Nations must continue international dialogue with the current and potential donors on how to support peace-building initiatives within the country.
The United Nations must recognize the need for ongoing humanitarian operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the vital importance of ensuring that humanitarian and rehabilitation activities are complementary, reinforcing common objectives of saving lives, rebuilding livelihoods and promoting peace and reconciliation.
To this end the United Nations should draw up a country strategy in collaboration with civil society and the non-governmental organizations, aimed at rehabilitation of the communities and at promoting peace and reconciliation.
MONUC should continue to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance and help to create an environment conducive to the provision of rehabilitation support to war-affected communities.
The United Nations should field a follow-up technical mission to Kisangani to obtain detailed costs of the actual damage to houses, public buildings and basic infrastructure identified in this report, and to fulfil all the requirements of paragraph 14 of resolution 1304 (2000).
Supplementary recommendations
On the basis of work already being carried out by the United Nations country team, an innovative and less orthodox approach to the use of humanitarian and rehabilitation support should be attempted, recognizing the complexities of the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to reduce the dependency on external assistance and to help create conditions locally for peace and reconciliation.
A working group involving key agencies should be established at United Nations Headquarters in New York to support the work of the country team.
The international donor community must increase the level of funding for humanitarian assistance as outlined in the consolidated appeals process.
However, in Kisangani and elsewhere in the Democratic Republic of the Congo it is imperative to help rebuild people's traditional capacities and self-sufficiency in the affected communities.
Such programmes should aim to wean the population from humanitarian aid and establish a sustainable base for rehabilitation, generated at the local level.
This would include using food aid to promote agriculture and support staff and their families working in the education and health sectors.
It would involve developing close working relations with civil society and local authorities in the implementation of community-based projects, targeting vulnerable groups such as returning internally displaced persons, single-headed households etc.
Rehabilitation programmes should adopt a flexible approach that could be phased in and implemented as programmes combining both sustainable development and peace-building initiatives.
Kisangani would be viewed as the pilot phase that could then be replicated in other parts of the country and/or region.
Major rehabilitation projects are needed to rebuild houses, improve the power supply, water systems and road and bridge infrastructure.
Rehabilitation of Kisangani's electricity supply is a priority which should be addressed as a part of a comprehensive reconstruction and rehabilitation plan.
Transport routes in the region need to be reopened to facilitate commercial trade and the economic regeneration of Kisangani and other isolated areas.
Reopening navigation on the Congo River should be made a country priority, as should the rehabilitation of the railway from Kisangani to Ubundu.
The United Nations should monitor and facilitate trade along newly reopened transport routes.
Financial facilities for microcredit and farmer credit schemes should be established in order to allow those affected by the conflict to rebuild their livelihoods in a sustainable manner.
As well as the physical damage the mission was informed of significant psychological trauma inflicted on the population of Kisangani by the events before and during the fighting in June.
The United Nations must address the psychological dimension of this problem when implementing a reconstruction or rehabilitation programme.
International organizations should be encouraged to increase their presence in Kisangani and other locations to improve funding, to support the implementation and as a confidence-building measure for the populations at risk.
The context: an overview of the crisis
The current crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, formerly Zaire, has complex political and socio-economic roots.
Since 1998 the country has been the scene of a conflict that has involved seven neighbouring countries, threatens to destabilize the whole of central Africa and has exacerbated the already dire socio-economic and political situation in this former Belgian colony.
This has resulted in a division of the country into two zones of influence, preventing a return to a normal political life and the reconstruction of infrastructure and civil society.
Several attempts have been made to end the war.
After numerous meetings an agreement was signed at Lusaka on 10 July 1999.
However, the Lusaka Agreement has been subject to many major breaches caused by fighting between both pro-government forces and rebels, and allies within the factions.
A number of high-level diplomatic missions have been undertaken to try to maintain momentum for peace, but they have made little headway.
The ongoing armed conflict has prevented any efforts at economic stabilization and growth.
Although the Democratic Republic of the Congo has huge potential wealth in the form of natural resources (diamond mines, forests, agriculture, energy etc.), the economic situation has been in decline since the beginning of the 1960s and the country is today ranked 152 out of 174 in the 2000 UNDP Human Development Index.
The country's economic environment is marked by shrinking overall production, rampant inflation, monetary instability and a public finance deficit that is met only by exacerbating the already large foreign debt.
Purchasing power has fallen and unemployment is endemic.
Increasing numbers of the population are finding themselves economically marginalized.
Key indicators such as life expectancy, infant mortality rates, nutrition and food security, incidence of disease, literacy rates and access to basic services have all fallen much more slowly than the regional average.1 Poverty and vulnerability are increasing in a country that has the potential to be one of the world's richest.
The humanitarian community faces a series of major obstacles in addressing the needs of the escalating number of vulnerable people requiring assistance.
Since the beginning of the year, the United Nations consolidated appeals process mid-term review estimates that the number of war-affected people has risen by around 7 million to 20 million, including 1.8 million internally displaced and 420,000 refugees.
Following years of socio-economic degradation, the civil war is creating an increasingly dramatic crisis for vulnerable groups that are virtually cut off from traditional food sources.
Access to these vulnerable groups is at best intermittent, owing to the precarious security environment and bureaucratic delays in obtaining travel clearance.
The international humanitarian community has access to only 40 per cent of the affected population.
Resources are limited and serve less than 600,000 of these people with food assistance, although rudimentary health facilities are thought to be available to over 2 million people.
There has been a poor donor response to the 2000 United Nations consolidated appeal, less than 25 per cent having been received to date.
The city of Kisangani, located in the north-east of the country and at the geographical centre of the African continent, has been the scene of five conflicts in the last four years.
The third largest city of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and a commercial centre on the Congo River, Kisangani has effectively been cut off from the rest of the country.
Trade with Kinshasa has been interrupted and transport on the river is at present only by small boat and canoe.
Commerce is almost exclusively with Goma and Rwanda and by air, as all other transport routes are blocked.
Where roads are open they are in such bad condition as to make transport by anything but bicycle nearly impossible.
Economically, the city is almost totally isolated.
The necessity of airlifting supplies into the city has resulted in a general increase in the price of goods with staples such as beans and rice more than doubling.
This, in turn, is coupled to a fall in purchasing power, which is estimated by FAO to be less than half of what it was 10 years ago, making many basic goods too expensive for the average person.
Kisangani being a city that relied commercially on links with Kinshasa and river transport, the economic repercussions of this isolation have been enormous.
Sotexki, a textile factory whose staff has fallen from 2,500 to just 130, is a typical example of this.
Widespread unemployment, increased prices and a decrease in purchasing power have all contributed to a general rise in poverty within the city.
Civil servants have not been paid for years and, should they be paid, they would find that inflation has eaten into their salaries so severely as to make them almost worthless.
It is reported that they are increasingly turning to corruption as a way to make ends meet, further exacerbating problems.
Administrative structures have broken down and taxes remain unpaid, consequently there have been years of under-investment in and neglect of local infrastructure.
Typical of this is the electrical supply, which is estimated to be less than a third of total demand.
Of the three turbines of the city's hydroelectric power station, two date back to 1955 and have been out of action since 1998.
The third will stop functioning within 12 months unless spare parts can be obtained.
Without electricity the water pumping station will shut down, leaving over 600,000 people without reliable water supplies.
A 1999 nutritional study by Médecins sans frontières Holland estimated that 9.1 per cent of children aged 5 and under were suffering from severe malnutrition.
Food security in the city has been a problem for some months mainly because the city has been cut off from the surrounding areas that traditionally supply it.
There are increasing reports of cases of preventable diseases such as measles and polio, and health centres are poorly equipped and dependent on church groups and non-governmental organizations for the little funding they receive.
The city's schools have also been funded through church groups for some years.
The higher education facilities, which include a university, higher education colleges and a medical and law school, are for all intents and purposes closed.
A whole generation is at threat of growing up illiterate and/or without formal education.
Kisangani's situation has been further exacerbated by the recent conflict in which an estimated 720 civilians were killed and 65,000 displaced by fighting between Rwandan and Ugandan troops.
The conflict of 5-10 June 2000
Kisangani has been the theatre of several clashes between rebel and government troops and between erstwhile allies according to some observers.
The most recent of these occurred from 5 to 11 June 2000, when the city was the scene of fighting between Ugandan and Rwandan troops which included widespread indiscriminate shelling by both sides.
Ugandan and Rwandan forces and their affiliated rebel groups vied for control of the lucrative diamond industry centred in the city, with assets being removed and channelled out of the country, ignoring local Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie (RCD) authorities.
In addition, rivalry intensified as parties tried to gain credibility by being the controlling authority in one of the main provincial MONUC locations.
Another factor is the strategic position of Kisangani as an entrepôt at the non-navigable rapids between the small river upstream and the large navigable river downstream.
Throughout this period, while forces scrambled for control of the city and its resources, the civilian population were terrorized and threatened through the use of radio hate campaigns that attempted to force people to leave the city.
Persisting tension between Ugandan and Rwandan troops degenerated into open and violent clashes for the first time in August 1999, the fighting spreading from garrisons and military camps into residential areas of the city.
Another round of clashes was prevented from becoming outright war in mid-May 2000 when members of the Security Council's mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUC brokered a ceasefire agreement, including a disengagement plan.
However, despite acceptance of the agreement by both the Rwandan Patriotic Army and the Uganda People's Defence Forces and the deployment of additional United Nations military observers, the situation remained highly volatile throughout May, and continued to disrupt economic trade and traditional food supply lines.
By the end of the month the humanitarian community negotiated a resumption of air traffic with the belligerents to allow supplies to be flown in, as the city is not accessible by inland transport, thus preventing further deterioration of the population's health and nutritional status.
Hostilities once again broke out on 5 June and lasted for six days, killing and wounding numbers of civilians in the indiscriminate bombing by both sides.
Losses among the civilian population were high and damage to the city's infrastructure and housing was widespread.
Over 760 civilians were killed and an estimated 1,700 wounded.
Over 4,000 dwellings were damaged, destroyed or made uninhabitable (see table 1).
Sixty-nine schools were partially destroyed or damaged (see table 2), and other public buildings were badly affected.
Power stations and the water-supply systems were severely disrupted.
The fighting forced some 65,000 residents to flee Kisangani and seek refuge in the nearby forests.
Around 3,000 internally displaced people were housed in a camp at Katele.
Table 1 Damage to housing during the war of 5-11 June 2000
Table 2 Damage to schools during the war of 5-11 June 2000
Tables prepared from information supplied by United Nations country team and non-governmental organizations.
Beyond the physical damage, the psychological trauma inflicted on the civilian population is immeasurable.
During the Kisangani hostilities and throughout the war, a hallmark of the crisis has been a blatant disregard for international human rights and humanitarian law.
The war has been marked by gross violations of human rights, the civilian populations being offered no protection and intentionally targeted by all sides through widespread atrocities.
Ordinary civilians in the city came to realize that they were in a highly vulnerable situation.
The latest clash made plain to the people of Kisangani how ill-prepared they were, with very few contingency food stocks and little capacity to sustain them through the crisis, heightening their trauma levels still further.
On 5 June, children were in school when fighting broke out.
Many were trapped for days inside school buildings, only able to return home to safety during lulls in the shelling.
Several school premises were actually used by Ugandan and Rwandan armed forces to launch attacks and as fallback positions.
This accounts for the high number of schools damaged during the six-day war.
Extensive damage to residential areas caused by the indiscriminate shelling and fighting in residential areas was a clear indication of the blatant disregard by the warring parties for the civilian population.
The humanitarian response
The humanitarian response in the aftermath of the Kisangani crisis was an example of good collaboration and coordination by both national and international bodies.
Local health personnel with limited means treated the growing number of injured and wounded.
National Red Cross Society volunteers were deployed to undertake the first phase of assistance to victims, including first aid, sanitation support, mine and unexploded ordnance awareness campaigns and burials.
The International Committee of the Red Cross and Médecins sans frontières provided the necessary medical assistance to the war wounded within hours of the ceasefire on 11 June.
On 13 June, the humanitarian community in the Democratic Republic of the Congo mounted a second phase of response, most notably through the Emergency Humanitarian Initiative fund of the United Nations system and the donor community, including the Governments of Belgium, Italy and the United States of America.
The United Nations and its non-governmental organization partners, especially Memisa and Catholic Relief Services, organized a major airlift operation between Kinshasa and Kisangani, and between Goma and Kisangani.
The United Nations airlift between Kinshasa and Kisangani rapidly brought in stocks (over 120 tons) of emergency supplies, equipment and fuel.
Rapid assessments of the internally displaced populations were carried out on all major axes connecting Kisangani with the rest of Orientale Province.
Emergency medical assistance and non-food supplies were delivered to internally displaced persons in Kisangani and its environs, and food aid was distributed inside the city.
Health centres were reopened and emergency medical services were organized on Kisangani road axes.
Comprehensive epidemiological surveillance mechanisms were established for the affected populations.
Surgical operations were carried out in the city hospitals of Kisangani with the help of Congolese surgeons brought from Kinshasa.
Landmines and unexploded ordnance are still a major impediment to the return of displaced people to their homes and to the resumption of daily life in the city.
Mines were laid in strategic military locations to prevent the advance of troops and protect retreating forces.
Around 18 mines were placed on the Tshopo bridge, the major link in the city.
Reports indicate that some mines were laid after the ceasefire.
Beyond emergency response
An inter-agency plan of action was drawn up to systematically address the life-saving requirements of the war-affected population of Kisangani for the first 100 days.
This plan included identification of internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups in need of food assistance, medical attention and psychological support, as well as supplying essential items such as engine oil and parts for the hydroelectrical station and water-supply system.
The humanitarian community is currently planning activities that move beyond the emergency phase of the first 100 days.
If the Kisangani demilitarization plan takes firm root, it will allow a humanitarian space, 90 km in diameter, to be created in the town and its vicinity for the first time since the two-year war began.
Meanwhile the displaced populations who are living along the five main axis roads outside Kisangani remain unconvinced by the demilitarization plan, including the withdrawal of foreign troops, and refuse to return to their homes.
However, with the humanitarian agencies working closely with civil society in the transition phase, a more conducive environment should emerge.
During the six days of conflict in Kisangani, the civilian population rallied to help those less fortunate by offering food and shelter to those displaced by the fighting.
This phase of the war made residents realize the extent to which they were ill-prepared, having no contingency supplies and powerless to prevent being targeted during the fighting.
These feelings of vulnerability and humiliation continue to induce fear and panic in the population, despite the demilitarization of the town.
Kisangani emerges as an opportunity to strengthen the population's capacity not only to overcome the trauma brought about by a war fought in the city by foreign troops, but also to address the general uncertainty and economic hardship that has been a way of life for over two years.
The challenge for the humanitarian community, both international and national, remains the integration of emergency assistance and capacity-enforcing initiatives that promote sustainable peace in a militarily unstable environment.
The international community's response to the hostilities in Kisangani helped to further strengthen links with civil society and local administration.
These partnership arrangements and support to local initiatives are helping to improve social, welfare and economic conditions for the population.
The Church is one of the traditional pillars of Congolese society and in the absence of the State has been involved in supporting 80 per cent of primary schools and providing primary medical care throughout the country.
Close partnership must be developed with the international community to develop a wide range of projects to move beyond the current emergency phase.
The existence of a strong civil society, including a large number of national non-governmental organizations, is a characteristic feature of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
National non-governmental organizations are present in Kisangani and in even the remotest parts of the country.
While the war has curtailed their potential, the indigenous social structures remain a valuable asset for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and for future rehabilitation programmes to develop self-sufficiency and sustainability.
During the six-day war in Kisangani, national groups and organizations clearly demonstrated their ability to take responsibility and mount a credible response, working with international bodies.
While much attention has been focused on the tragedy in Kisangani, it is important not to ignore the large-scale suffering of the rest of the population in the east and other parts of the country.
The continuing and increased suffering of many people is the result of a combination of factors, including renewed fighting, increasing impoverishment and continuing ethnic hatred.
The attempts being made in Kisangani by the international community in collaboration with national non-governmental organizations and civil society can be viewed as a pilot scheme which could be replicated in other parts of the country when access and resource availability improves.
Agencies in Kisangani are currently considering shortening the duration of emergency humanitarian assistance by seeking increased funding of rehabilitation and recovery activities without waiting for a durable peace to be in place.
This has been prompted in part by logistical constraints.
WFP is currently exploring the possibilities of purchasing food supplies locally, to reduce costs and stimulate the agricultural sector.
For the international community working with civil society the emphasis is on the post-crisis context, promoting rehabilitation, expanding basic services to more people, and attempting to tackle the root causes of poverty and exclusion.
It is hoped that this will be the foundation for the reconstruction of governance, law and order, social cohesion and participation and rehabilitation of the economy from micro to macro levels.
Despite the precarious situation, Kisangani is well placed to test new and imaginative ways to establish a comprehensive transitional approach, to move away from emergency relief by integrating humanitarian and reconstruction programmes at the earliest possible opportunity.
A transitional medium-term plan has been drawn up by the international agencies in collaboration with civil society and local authorities.
It includes food-for-work programmes to assist the social sector (health centres and schools), substituting temporary relief assistance for school and medical fees.
This approach aims to embrace activities directed at alleviating physical suffering (emergency food and medical assistance) and protecting fundamental human rights.
It involves not only addressing the immediate crisis but also building local institutional and societal means to minimize future crises, reducing the vulnerability of the civilian population by reducing their dependence on humanitarian assistance, and seeking to build on their capacities for sustainable livelihood.
The international community's firm stance in promoting the implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement with the assistance of MONUC and through the demilitarization of Kisangani will help to bring an end to the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
MONUC monitoring of the political and security situation in Kisangani and its environs is essential to determine the limits of operational modalities for agencies.
Appendix
Terms of reference of the Kisangani evaluation mission
A meeting of concerned departments and agencies this afternoon has reached provisional agreement on the terms of reference of the Kisangani evaluation mission.
These are focused primarily on paragraph 14 of Security Council resolution 1304 (2000), and are as follows.  The mission should:
• Proceed to Kisangani to assess the damage there and to evaluate the overall situation, including long-term reconstruction and rehabilitation aspects;
• Make a preliminary assessment of the loss of life and property damage caused in the recent fighting;
• Determine, in close coordination with MONUC, whether the United Nations should assist the population of Kisangani in other areas and, if so, how it should do so;
• Propose measures, in close coordination with MONUC, to follow up the mission's visit;
• Submit a report to the Secretary-General with proposals for recommendations he might make to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1304 (2000).
The mission leader, Omar Bakhet, will now conduct consultations to determine the membership of the team.
Participants in the meeting agreed that the expertise of their counterparts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would be at his disposal.
It is envisaged that the mission would visit the Democratic Republic of the Congo on or about 15 August, and would submit its report by the end of August.
The mission may also decide to visit Kigali and Kampala.
Department of Peacekeeping Operations 20 July 2000
UNDP, Human Development Report 2000.
Action contre la faim USA, “Rapport de Mission exploratoire à Kisangani, Province orientale”, April 1999.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, “Approvisionnement de Kisangani.  Situation et actions à envisager”, August 2000.
The taking of the town by the forces of Laurent-Désiré Kabilà upon his rise to power, its capture by RCD and three conflicts between the Ugandan and Rwandan forces — the three-day (August 1999), one-day (May 2000) and six-day (June 2000) wars.
1 December 2000  Original: ENGLISH
(Sixty-third session, 13-15 February 2001,
agenda item 9(c))
Studies on transport economics and track costs
undertaken by other organizations
Addendum 2
Transmitted by the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD)
Note: This paper is reproduced in the form in which it was received by the secretariat.
It should be noted that the text of the Executive Summaries are subject to change before publication of the respective reports by OECD.
Background and tasks
This project on institutional aspects aimed to compare and assess the impact of different organisational structures on transport planning and intermodal policy development.
The key focus was the government - rather than the private - sector.
The starting point was the observation that transport policy and organisational arrangements have generally developed along modal lines, which may hinder the adoption of a co-ordinated intermodal approach.
The project was not aimed at identifying and removing impediments to intermodal transport operations.
These are properly matters for later work.
This report does not address whether one policy (or combination of policies) is more effective or appropriate than another, but rather provides a “toolkit” for setting up intermodal arrangements or evaluating organisational structures on intermodal transport.
Definition of Intermodalism
Intermodalism is not limited to the promotion of a modal shift from road transport to other modes.
It also stands for the promotion of improvements in the transport chain without modal shift.
For the purpose of this study, a fairly general and broad definition has been chosen.
Intermodalism implies the use of at least two different modes of transport in an integrated manner in a door-to-door transport chain.
While the concept of intermodalism encompasses all freight movements involving two or more modes of transportation, the principal focus in this study was on movement of non-bulk and containerised freight.
Modal approaches are necessary prerequisites … but not sufficient
Intermodal transport is hampered if the performance of any of the key transport modes is inadequate or if the linkages between modes are not efficient and reliable.
Many of the policy measures considered likely to promote “intermodalism” include - but are not limited to - mode-specific actions.
In most countries, there is emphasis in the policy frameworks on promoting transport efficiency and facilitating modal reform.
While the approaches to achieving transport efficiency improvements differ, policy frameworks generally support competitive operating environments.
In order to achieve improvements in efficiency and environmental outcomes that go beyond those that can be realised by purely modal policies, many countries are now considering transport issues from the perspective of the whole door-to-door transport chain.
It is difficult to design and implement “true” intermodal measures given that the costs can often be considerable (and beyond the resources of individual users) while the benefits can be widely dispersed across a range of users and difficult to recover under current pricing systems.
Different approaches can be taken, depending on governmental involvement in transport ownership/provision and transport operations
Governments which have a high level of involvement in transport infrastructure ownership/provision and transport operations need to be actively involved in intermodal policy development and the intermodal actions taken by their transport operations
In countries where there is increasing private ownership and/or operation of transport infrastructure (as governments have withdrawn from involvement in commercial transport operations), intermodal transport improvements are largely driven by industry interests (shippers and carriers) seeking to provide value-added services and find least-cost solutions to transportation problems.
In countries with a high level of reliance on market forces and private infrastructure ownership and operations, there are nevertheless a number of policy issues relating to the efficiency of transport services, charging and taxing regimes and environmental aspects of transport infrastructure and operations that require intermodal policy consideration.
Policy instruments
Transport administrations with established and dedicated intermodal transport programmes and resources - such as a special action programme, a special task force, an intermodal transport policy unit or other similar organisational provisions - have developed more explicit and more focused intermodal transport policies than have transport administrations having purely “mono”-modal units.
Governments that are more interventionist or more directly involved in ownership of transport operations are also likely to use regulatory measures such as licensing exemptions and driving bans at specified times to favour intermodal transport.
In countries with greater reliance on market forces, use of such regulatory instruments by government is limited.
Communication between intermodal transport policy units and other actors
Intermodal policy development requires co-operative arrangements between government and the private sector.
Intermodal transport policies and improvements need to be developed co-operatively with modal approaches to ensure that they are targeted at existing impediments and aimed at getting the linkages right.
The likelihood of intermodal transport policy being successful depends on the relationship between intermodal transport policy units (or other policy structures), industry advisory bodies and other stakeholders.
Performance-based outcomes
Possible organisational benchmarks can be identified, but it is extremely difficult to measure the effectiveness of a policy and even more difficult to compare the effectiveness of policies in different countries.
Instead, the approaches outlined provide a “toolkit” for countries when setting up intermodal arrangements or considering organisational structures for intermodal transport.
The true value of intermodal approaches should be assessed in terms of performance “on the ground”, rather than in terms of factors such as institutional arrangements alone.
Intermodal projects should be evaluated on a “case-by-case” basis, working with the private and public sector organisations involved.
Such an approach is similar to that adopted in many other aspects of transport (such as safety) where macro indicators may not provide a reliable guide to the effectiveness of individual programmes.
Identification and removal of impediments
Further work should concentrate on developing benchmarks for monitoring intermodal performance of modes, modal combinations and modal interfaces and identifying policy options for governments to address impediments to intermodal efficiency.
Draft Final Report
Background
A set of performance indicators.
A major recommendation of this Group was to create a task force to conduct a co-ordinated set of field tests for selected performance indicators.
The Task refined the indicators, which were pre-selected, and tested them over a period of two years.
The field tests allowed the applicability of the performance indicators to be evaluated, in order to determine their value in improving the management of road administration.
The following countries participated in the Field Test: Australia, Belgium (Walloon region), Denmark, Finland, Hungary, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States (both Federal Highway Administration and Minnesota Department of Transportation).
The following 15 performance indicators (PI) were tested:
Average road user costs.
Level of satisfaction regarding travel time and its reliability and quality of road user information.
Protected road user risk.
Unprotected road user risk.
Environmental policy/programmes.
Processes in place for market research and customer feedback.
Long-term programmes.
Allocation of resources to road infrastructure.
Quality management/audit programmes.
Forecast values of road costs vs. actual costs.
Overhead percentage.
Value of assets.
Roughness.
State of road bridges.
Satisfaction with road system.
An emerging challenge for road administrations is to define goals and objectives pertinent to current community views, and to devise creative ways to respond to contemporary problems.
The most important observation from the report Performance Indicators for the Road Sector (OECD, 1997), was that much less emphasis must be put on quantitative analysis, compared to qualitative assessment of the purposes the road programme is serving, and whether these reflect the views of the public.
The objective is to widen the views of road managers and planners to reflect the vision of an integrated transport system in society and the role road administration plays in achieving it.
In the long-term, generic road administration processes, with recommended key rules, could be developed from the various existing processes, allowing practices to be compared.
This may entail developing common indicators/criteria as well as a data information network and management system for OECD countries.
This report provides a description of the approach adopted by the Group, as well as a summary of the results from the field tests.
Approach
The main objectives of the Task Force were:
To test and learn from the application of the 15 road administration performance indicators.
Generic vision for the road transport system
In general, key issues facing the road transport system and road administrations are:
Demand for better results and quality.  Demand for more co-ordination and co-operation across transport sector.
The road system comprises three components, which respond to change at different rates.  Transport demands (driven by human behaviour) change rapidly in response to customer needs, while improvements in vehicle design evolve comparatively slowly (10 years) and road design and construction even more slowly (30 to 60 years).
Two roles have been identified within a road administration.
One role is responsibility for the consequences of the road transport system for the whole society.
The other role is the responsibility for road production (roads, bridges, tunnels etc.) on an open and competitive market.
These two different roles may cause problems or at least inefficiency in operation if carried out by the same organisation or if not clearly understood to be separate processes.
The two roles of the road administration should therefore be recognised and described.
Experience from the general reorganisation of the road administrations around the world indicates that a primary benefit is the clear identification of roles of the road administration, with its responsibility for road policy and the condition and quality level of the road network.
In particular:
Road production together with the road administration for producing the required quality.
Independent responsibility for activities.
It is very important to recognise the scope of responsibility of the road administration within the road transport system.
Some of the indicators used in this field test were partially outside of the area of responsibility of road administrations.
Much of the performance is dictated by policies set by government.
For example, the performance of road administrations in the area of road crashes depends on and reflects the views and needs of the government and road user.
In practice, the means for the road administration to improve these performances is limited unless the authority and responsibility of the road administration are wider in the whole transport sector decision-making process.
Another example is road user costs.
Although the road administration can influence the value of the road user costs by constructing and designing better transport infrastructure, it has little or no jurisdiction over the majority of road user costs which also include fuel and vehicle taxes for example.
The overall organisational structure of a country's transport sector has a significant influence on efficiency and the results of performance indicators.
Strong modal administrations within centralised ministries perform differently to administrations that deal with wider issues than road network management.
In addition, in some countries the road administration is responsible for the entire national road network, whereas in others much of the responsibility may lie with local authorities while the road administration is responsible for the motorway network.
Selection of the performance indicators
A key component of the most successful road projects and programmes is a well-defined set of goals and objectives.
However, the use of performance indicators goes well beyond evaluating the degree to which goals and objectives have been achieved.
The use of performance indicators by a road administration depends on the particular needs for development or improvement in performance.
The main aspects that influence decisions on the use of performance indicators are:
The 15 performance indicators selected for this project are not representative of the “ideal” or even the most important.
They were selected by the Expert Group to cover the previously developed taxonomy.
Of the 15 performance indicators selected for the field test, ten could be defined as exact measures with an associated absolute value.
The other five were “yes/no” indicators, giving a qualitative measure of performance rather than exact values.
Additional data were required for further analysis, particularly to give detailed explanations for the “yes” or “no” answers.
The use to which performance indicators are put in different countries and road administrations was of primary importance to this field test.
A comparison of actual indicator results revealed little information on the performance of a road administration.
How to use the performance indicators
Performance indicators can be applied to road programme evaluation, planning and organisation management in the following ways:  In process management to measure the success of individual processes or groups of processes.
PI1: Average road user cost (car and truck)
Road agencies should continue to monitor road user cost within their jurisdictions over the long term, so that a basis exists for monitoring changes and trends in road user cost levels.
Further work should be undertaken by road agencies to identify the reasons for differences in the cost components of road user cost, between jurisdictions as measured by the HDM III methodology.
PI2: Level of satisfaction regarding travel time, reliability and quality of road user information
The elements that contribute to this indicator are, in the majority of cases, in the relatively early stages of development.
Even more experienced countries in this field are still in the learning process.
At present, the “Satisfaction with the quality of information provided” element fails to provide enough detailed information to set benchmarks and to implement an improvement strategy.
In order for this indicator to work effectively and provide reliable data for the targeting of policy and strategy, the authority must be able to measure and compare the level of road user satisfaction with a known travel time.
It is therefore recommended that future work should follow the development of this type of measure and monitor its impact on future strategy and performance.
This performance indicator could become a useful tool in measuring the performance of a road authority from the road users' perspective.
Where a road authority is able to “optimise” the journey time on its network and where road user satisfaction is high, one can assume that the road authority is performing to a high standard.
However, with its current limited application, it would be premature to recommend this performance indicator whole-heartedly.
Further investigation of the current methods in use and a longer-term study of whether these can lead to improvements for the road system and the road user are needed before any genuine recommendations can be made.
PI3 and PI4: Protected and unprotected road user risk
Performance Indicators should be closely related to the products and services being measured in order to be efficient evaluation tools for management.
Fatality risk is not a suitable indicator for measuring the road safety performance of a road administration.
More specific data are required for the development and implementation of effective road safety programmes and their evaluation.
More specific indicators include average speed for different road types, number of drunk drivers, crash risks for new/young drivers, seat belt use.
PI5: Environmental policy/programme (yes/no)
Road administrations should have environmental policies and programmes aimed at achieving wider environmental objectives.
The policy/programmes should contain the characteristics described in the ISO 14001 standard.
This indicator mainly shows whether environmental activities have been initiated and, to a lesser extent, how far the process has gone compared to the characteristics outlined in the indicator definition.
As defined, the indicator does not give any information on the administration's concrete environmental targets.
More exact and preferably measurable indicators need to be developed for a more results oriented and systematic approach.
Preferably, these indicators should be verified at regular intervals.
PI6: Processes in place for market research and customer feedback (yes/no)
Road administrations should continue to use market research as a planning and feedback echanism.
More work should be done on this indicator to track the results of market research data and in particular whether the results make a difference.
When using market research, road administrations should be careful to balance expressed customer needs with other development factors such as cost, and overall system improvements.
Surveys should be phrased in a way to make the customers prioritise needs, keeping cost as a factor.
This is called a “level of service” decision.
PI7: Long-term programmes for construction, maintenance and operations (yes/no)
The existence of a long-term programme should be considered an indicator of a well-managed organisation.
The involvement of the public in its development and the identification of specific, measurable performance objectives in the programme should be considered “best practices” for a long-term programme.
The objectives for any road administration would be to get the approval for their multi-year programme from the highest political level, e.g. the government.
Implementation of the long-term programme should include objectives and performance indicators that reflect public opinion and customer needs, and their achievements should be annually monitored.
There should be more transparency in developing the long-term programmes; the setting of objectives, the estimation of costs, the estimation of impacts, and the evaluation and reporting of their implementation.
PI8: Allocation of resources to road infrastructure (yes/no)
There are significant opportunities for improving resource allocation systems and procedures in road administrations.
Examples of systems and procedures are available to stimulate this process.
Road administrations need to exchange and share information, knowledge, and experience to better understand and identify issues and areas, where the improvement of systems and procedures is opportune for their particular circumstances.
Road administrations should consider assessing the standard and robustness of their systems, procedures and processes against the “best practice” concepts developed in this project.
PI9: Quality management audit programme (yes/no)
Quality management systems should be adopted as a means to develop the performance of road administrations.
The establishment of such a system requires a major effort from the organisation, but the effort is worthwhile.
The complexity of the quality management system should be carefully examined.
For quality management, it is recommended that road administrations adopt ISO 9004:2000.
The PI9 Quality Management/Audit Programme, as defined in the field test, is a good originator/initiator of the road administrations management and it outlines the overall situation in different countries.
However, it does not detail the actual situation, specifically the real performance of the road administration.
In order to get more information on this issue, the indicator needs further development.
PI10: Forecast values of road costs versus the actual costs
Although the establishment of benchmarks and international comparisons was not possible, it is still recommended that each road administration should emphasise the reduction of project cost overruns.
Administrations should strive to make the implementation of road projects more efficient.
This indicator provides the key to monitoring overruns and can be used as the basis for improving the planning process to better anticipate variations in project implementation.
Road administrations should use this indicator but it requires further analysis.
It is necessary to collect more chronological and accurate data; to check the results annually together with a reviewing process for the next-year management; and to monitor and evaluate project objectives regularly.
It is not possible to recommend a “best practice” from the participating countries for this indicator.
PI11: Overhead percentage
This indicator is useful in evaluating the cost-effectiveness of the road administration.
In addition, international comparisons can be made if the same basis of comparison is used to establish the appropriate relative performance.
The definition of components comprising this indicator requires further consideration.
Hence, it is difficult to select the “best practice” among participating countries.
Each road administration is recommended to evaluate their own trends of overhead percentage within their country.
The objective should be to lower constantly the overhead percentage in order to improve the effectiveness and the overall performance of the road administration.
PI12: Value of assets
There are significant opportunities to use asset valuation to improve the systems and methods of road administrations.
Asset values provide significant information for government, road agencies, road users and taxpayers.
This indicator is still being developed in most road administrations, a further exchange of information regarding the use of this indicator in road management would therefore be beneficial.
An OECD Working Group is currently doing further work on this topic and more specifically on Asset Management Systems (OECD, forthcoming in 2001).
PI13: Roughness
The responses clearly show that the measure of roughness as done in the field test does not allow useful comparisons to be made across countries.
The study is based on the thresholds matrix derived from the HDM-III model of the World Bank which incorporates limits which are too broad to allow effective application in developed countries.
This situation leads to measures located nearly exclusively in the “very good” and “good” categories.
The measure of roughness is a very useful performance indicator, only if the reference tool is adapted to the development level of the country evaluated.
A stricter thresholds matrix should therefore be used in developed countries, to generate more precise data, with the user's comfort as the objective.
In developing countries, the larger matrix is sufficient.
In this case, the final goal is to evaluate the level of mobility and user safety.
Besides this technical use, roughness measures are especially relevant in a budget allocation process.
PI14: State of road bridges
This indicator is recommended for all road administrations.
It is more difficult to give any technical recommendations given the wide range of tools in use.
No “best practice” is recommended for this indicator.
However, the detailed report provides useful information from different countries.
PI15: Satisfaction with the road system
Satisfaction with road system condition has been found to be a useful indicator with many applications.
It is perhaps the best summary descriptor of the long-term performance of the road programme.
It is most useful as a trend or series of annual summaries.
The indicator is country specific, but inter-regional (state) comparisons are possible.
“Best practice” can be defined as a standard and applicable process for market surveys and customer feedback to monitor and measure road user satisfaction with road system condition (see also PI6).  In addition to having processes in place, best practice could include some of the following issues:
None of the responses indicated any direct connection between the road user satisfaction survey results and the programming process (objective setting).
No “best practice” can be recommended.
Conclusions and recommendations
The analysis of performance using key indicators provides road administrations with the basis to redefine activities.
However, having established the differences in the performance across road administrations and the reasons for those differences, the real challenge is to start the development work for change.
This was left for each participating road administration to implement.
A key aspect of the project was the comparison of the processes where the indicators are used.
The qualitative reflection on the role and function that the road programme is serving, and whether the execution of its mandates reflects the views of the public, represents an important framework for cultural change.
A quantitative comparison between administrations has limited usefulness without a thorough examination of the underlying reasons for the differences.
If numbers are compared, the most relevant comparison is the trend within a single administration over time.
It is inappropriate to define a common vision or common performance indicator target for all countries.
Each administration should define its own vision and determine best practices among other countries to realise that vision in the most effective way.
Hence it is essential to place each performance indicator in perspective with the role of the road administration in the entire road transport system and in society as a whole.
In other words, the report does not recommend defined visions to be adopted in any country.
It is suggested to use the results as a framework for evaluating the role and performance of the road administration.
Customer focus has increasing importance in assessing a road administration's performance.
The purpose is to widen road administrators' views to reflect the vision of the road transport system in society and the role of the road administration in it.
It is critical to understand that there are different types of performance indicators and different ways to use them.
This is important in selecting indicators for an administration.
Different indicators should be selected whether they are intended to improve:
The internal efficiency of the road administration.
The quality of the administration's products and services.
The outcome to the road transport system.
Any particular process of a specific engineering task.
The idea of a “learning organisation” was one of the driving forces in this work.
The main innovation was that the renewal and innovation abilities of every road administration should be increased in order to actively improve an organisation's ability to change.
Benefits to participating administrations
There was consensus amongst participants in this field-test that their administrations benefited from the use of performance indicators.
Although there was a wide difference in the extent of experience amongst participating administrations at the outset of this project, all benefited from carrying out this exercise together and learned from the experiences of other administrations.
As a result of the field test, several countries intend to develop the indicators further and apply their experience to other areas beyond the 15 indicators field-tested.
The more quantitative indicators (such as road roughness or fatalities) were easier to define and most administrations have collected data for many years.
For others, in particular the qualitative (yes/no) indicators, the definition was more difficult.
However, the exercise resulted in some innovative suggestions and points the way for improvements and continued use of these indicators.
At the outset, some doubts were expressed as to the applicability and usefulness of the qualitative indicators.
However, the field tests demonstrated the applicability of the quantitative indicators and their value in effecting change in an organisation.
A great deal of work is involved in defining indicators, collecting and analysing the results and using the results to effect change.
The participants in this field test are convinced that the outcomes are well worth the effort.
Recommendations for administrations wishing to embark on similar work
Before starting the exercise, the processes and management style of the administration should be defined.
The areas for improvement or development should be specified and the performance indicators should be selected.
The precondition for starting the benchmarking process is to recognise and define the correct performance indicators and to describe and understand the administration's core processes.
The indicators studied in this field test are not necessarily the most relevant, nor those which best respond to the specific needs of a road administration.
It is a mistake to start collecting data on a number of indicators without understanding the underlying process, or knowing what the information is going to be used for.
Each road administration should visit neighbouring road administrations (or those from other parts of the world) to see how they define their processes, carry out their business, and learn from them.
Draft Final Report
The road safety problem in OECD countries
Approximately 125 000 people die every year on the roads of OECD countries.
This means that a road crash victim dies every four minutes.
The real tragedy is that, to a large degree, these crashes, and the resultant deaths and injuries, are preventable.
Indeed, research shows that, when we consider the main causal factors of traffic crashes (the road user, the vehicle, and the roadway infrastructure), all crashes can be attributed to at least one of these factors.
Thus, adequate and increased investment in producing better drivers (and other road users), improved vehicle manufacturing and maintenance standards, and improved road design and maintenance standards can, and will, prevent road crashes.
Moreover, it is increasingly apparent that effective safety management processes are a fundamental step toward addressing road safety problems.
Only with good management systems in place will those responsible for road safety be able to compete successfully for resources, and make sound decisions with respect to the development and implementation of effective measures.
The argument for road safety investment is not simply an emotional one: road crashes represent a serious economic burden, with estimates of the cost of road crashes of up to 4% of GDP in some countries.
Even among countries which have shown significant overall improvement over the last 30 years, there is considerable disparity among their current death rates, ranging from less than 7 deaths per 100 000 population (United Kingdom, Sweden, Netherlands) to more than 18 (Korea, Portugal, Greece, Ireland, Poland).
This report identifies and assesses “best practices” among road safety programmes in OECD countries.  An emphasis is placed on those programmes that have been evaluated and proven effective through cost/benefit or other types of analyses.
In addition, the underlying criteria which influence the success or failure of these “best practices” are identified to facilitate the development of effective road safety policies in member countries.
Road safety visions, targets and plans
A vision for road safety should be developed and incorporated into political and societal philosophy.
It needs to be clear, simple and easy to communicate.
Ownership of the vision by all stakeholders is a key to ensuring success in achieving road safety objectives.
It should be designed to raise awareness of the social unacceptability of road fatalities and injuries, and hence, be incorporated into transport policy.
In the same way that drink-driving has now become socially unacceptable in many countries, other deviant road user behaviour (e.g. speeding) should be viewed likewise by society.
However, in order to secure public ownership, targets should be achievable within a realistic time frame.
Absolute targets (e.g. 10 fatalities per 100 000 population) may not be as effective as relative targets (e.g. no more than 10 fatalities per 100 000 population), in that the former implies a degree of acceptability or inevitability in road crashes.
Targets can be set by a top-down process (based on idealism) or through a bottom-up process (based on realism).
In the first case, the target is set without too much prior consideration as to how the target can be reached in terms of safety measures and at what costs.
In the second case, targets are based on the estimated effects of a set of road safety measures which are available; the required budget can be estimated at the same time.
Normal practice is usually a combination of the top-down and bottom-up approaches.
The setting of targets has proven its value in many countries.
Target setting leads to more realistic and effective programmes, results in more integration of institutional efforts and often produces a more focused allocation of resources by securing political commitment.
Communication of the vision, targets and strategies to raise awareness within society should pave the way for ownership and acceptability of the measures introduced to attack the social problem of road safety.
Road safety plans and programmes
Action plans need to be comprehensive and focused on outcomes.
Their development should involve all relevant stakeholders in order to achieve effective implementation, particularly in those areas where society needs to make important trade-offs (e.g. lower levels of blood alcohol, speed, seatbelt wearing or compulsory wearing of helmets for cyclists).
Plans may be general (e.g. national) or specific (e.g. rural road safety), may involve differing time horizons, and may target high-risk groups (e.g. children's safety).
Plans, incorporating a clear vision and target(s) for road safety represent key elements for galvanising funds to support key strategies/measures to improve road safety.
The overall responsibility for traffic safety policy, politically and technically, should in principle be at the national level.
Multi-annual programming of the actions, supported by systematic public information and communication, is mostly necessary.
Also the participation of the regional and local levels are important, e.g. by allocating specific responsibilities at each level.
In addition, it is recommended that safety plans be developed at regional and local levels.
The planning of measures can be based on existing knowledge regarding their effectiveness and efficiency.
Their contribution to the target (fatality and injury reduction) should be optimised, through reduction of risk and/or exposure.
Where the effects of new measures on the key indicators are unknown, other indicators of effectiveness could be used (behaviour, knowledge, organisational performance).
Experiments with innovative solutions can prove useful; these projects have to be accompanied by actions of communications and thorough evaluation.
The composition of the safety programme demands a ranking of possible safety measures.
Besides economic efficiency (in relation to the intended effects), side effects (on transport and environment), social equity, funding mechanisms and political feasibility can be taken into account.
Road safety budgets should be allocated to realise a maximum return to society.
Three socio-economic tools are available to support resource allocation decisions: cost-effectiveness analysis, multi-criteria analysis and cost-benefit analysis.
Theoretically, social cost benefit analysis is the best tool to achieve optimal use of scarce resources.
However, cost benefit analysis requires extensive information that is not readily available and hence, it is not often possible to use as the main criterion.
Research into increasing the applicability of cost benefit analysis is therefore strongly recommended.
Currently, the allocation of budgets to road safety is based on political priority ranking of problems in society.
Funds are therefore often insufficient for financing all efficient projects.
Once the target is set, cost-effectiveness analysis or multi-criteria analysis can be used to select the `best' set of measures to realise this objective.
If available data (on costs and safety effects of alternative projects) allow, cost-effectiveness analysis helps to determine the most efficient path to achieving these goals.
Multi-criteria analysis can be used for ranking measures, even without quantitative data, but does not guarantee economic efficiency.
Despite their limitations, analytical procedures (cost benefit analysis, cost-effectiveness analysis, multi-criteria analysis) are important tools for guiding the decision making process in identifying appropriate measures and setting priorities.
Road safety measures
In view of the set targets an inventory should be made of possible safety measures, directed at human behaviour, vehicles, roads and environment.
A broad traffic safety programme should include measures for roads as part of the transport system, land use planning, road infrastructure, traffic education, public information, legislation and enforcement, telematics and vehicle technology.
National and regional differences in regulations (for example, driving hours, vehicle standards, licensing provisions) should be taken into account.
There is much agreement between countries regarding the main road safety problems.
A wide variety of solutions have been put in place in OECD countries and further measures are being developed for implementation.
However, no country has implemented all proven measures to their full extent.
Further, the realisation of expected benefits from the implementation of any measure will depend on the level of enforcement that goes with it.
Significant gains in road safety could be achieved if all proven measures were implemented and enforced in all countries.
The more successful countries have now managed to reduce risk levels to 6 fatalities per 100 000 population even in countries with relatively high car ownership and mobility rates.
It is therefore not unreasonable to assume that all countries could achieve similar rates by fully implementing and enforcing known safety measures.
Political commitment is essential to ensure road safety is given a high priority.
Top officials therefore play a key role in championing road safety and ensuring it is placed high on the political agenda.
Co-ordination across all stakeholders at all stages of road safety planning and implementation is fundamental to realising road safety outcomes.
The responsibility for co-ordination between the numerous actors should be laid down at the national level.
This task can be achieved by various means such as legislation (e.g. guidelines), financial incentives and dissemination of knowledge and information.
The execution of this task should be monitored continuously.
A balance between a completely integrated programme and innovative actions often initiated by the local level should be sought.
Safety integration across all levels of government and agencies (including enforcement) in road safety target setting, planning, programme development and implementation is recommended.
All organisations with responsibility for aspects of road safety should therefore inform others and co-ordinate their activities.
Further, it ensures that public policy is less likely to work against road safety because of the dialogue and co-ordination among all primary and secondary entities that are stakeholders in road safety.
Removal of institutional barriers by using an integrated road safety management approach should be considered.
The safety conditions of road infrastructure and road vehicles as well as the education of road users all combine to impact the level of safety.
Furthermore, organisations and groups that are involved in setting the targets will support the planning and implementation of the road safety programmes and the later task of evaluating their effects.
To achieve harmonisation in road safety programmes, programme development should occur at both the national and regional levels.
Harmonisation between programmes at these levels is desirable.
Regional governments should therefore participate in the planning of national level programmes and the national government should take part in the planning of regional level programmes.
While sound fatality data exist, there are serious data deficiencies in many other areas.
This is a key element of safety management to ensure that the best possible decisions are made.
The database should be easy to use and accessible to all organisations involved in road safety.
Feedback-mechanisms to the agencies in charge of implementing measures should be in place, which should be activated through the outcomes of the monitoring and evaluation process.
It is advisable that an independent agency with good research capabilities be put in charge of this monitoring and evaluation.
Ex-post evaluation of measures should be part of any road safety strategy.
Methods for forecasting and evaluating the results of road safety measures need to be developed in order to improve programmes or plan new programmes.
They should be based on past traffic crash and incident data and analysis of information about near-crash events.
It is often difficult to find quantified evidence of the cost-effectiveness of road safety measures.
This does not necessarily mean that countries are not evaluating the effects of measures, although good examples of consistent cost-benefit analyses are hard to find.
For this reason, consideration should be given to a review of cost-effectiveness of road safety measures, with a view to producing clear guidance on the state of the art in methods of evaluation, and on the measures likely to have the best benefit-cost ratios.
Recommendations
The development of a vision and setting of targets has proven its value in many countries.
Target setting leads to more realistic and effective programmes, results in more integration of institutional efforts and often produces a more focused allocation of resources by securing political commitment.
In the same way that drink-driving has now become socially unacceptable in many countries, other deviant road user behaviour (e.g. speeding) should be viewed likewise by society.
Raising public awareness and participation is crucial to the success of safety measures, and gaining support for measures being implemented.
National co-ordination of road safety strategies should be undertaken which involves all stakeholders (e.g. infrastructure providers, vehicle, road user groups, police, emergency response).
They should participate in the development of the national road safety action plan, including regional and local governments.
Responsibility should include both policy and technical assistance.
Regional and local road safety action plans should be developed, and be derived from the national plan.
The benefits from road safety measures should be quantified and ranked so that maximum returns are realised.
Analytical procedures (cost benefit analysis, cost-effectiveness analysis, and multi-criteria analysis) should be encouraged as part of the decision making process, but with the realisation that there may be other issues and political pressures which could lead to a different decision or prioritisation.
There is much agreement between countries regarding the main road safety problems.
A wide variety of solutions have been put in place in OECD countries and further measures and are being developed for implementation.
However, no country has implemented all proven measures to their full extent, and countries may benefit by adopting “best practice” measures developed by others.
Further, the realisation of expected benefits from the implementation of any measure depend on the level of enforcement that goes with it.
Data collection and management could be improved by integrating into an easy to use and accessible database all road traffic, exposure and crash data.
The collection of relevant performance indicators (e.g. behaviour data, near-collision data) should be improved in order to facilitate the evaluation of safety measures.
Methods for monitoring and evaluating the results of road safety measures need to be developed in order to improve programmes or plan new programmes.
They should be based on past traffic crash and incident data and analysis of information about driver behaviour and near-crash events.
Fifty-fifth session
Sixth Committee
Agenda item 161
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire and Cyprus: draft resolution
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations and the responsibilities of the host country,
Recalling also that, in accordance with paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, the Committee should consider, and advise the host country on, issues arising in connection with the implementation of the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the competent authorities of the host country, in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 62 of its report;1
Notes that the Committee has taken note of the opinion of the Legal Counsel of 1 September 2000 concerning the issuance of visas to participants in United Nations-related meetings, and that, in this connection, the Committee has recommended that the host country take that opinion into consideration in the future;
Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal work of the delegations and the missions accredited to the United Nations is in the interest of the United Nations and all Member States, and requests the host country to continue to take all measures necessary to prevent any interference with the functioning of missions;
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and hopes that the issues raised at the meetings of the Committee will continue to be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with international law;
Notes that during the reporting period the travel controls previously imposed by the host country on staff of certain missions and staff members of the Secretariat of certain nationalities remained in effect, and requests the host country to consider removing such travel controls, and in this regard notes the positions of affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country;
Also notes that the Committee anticipates that the host country will continue to ensure the issuance, in a timely manner, of entry visas to representatives of Member States, pursuant to article IV, section 11, of the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,3 inter alia, for the purpose of their attending official United Nations meetings;
Requests the host country to continue to take steps to resolve the problem relating to the parking of diplomatic vehicles in a fair, balanced and non-discriminatory way, with a view to responding to the growing needs of the diplomatic community, and to continue to consult with the Committee on this important issue;
Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United Nations with the host country;
Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session the item entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/55/26).
General Assembly resolution 22 A (I).
See General Assembly resolution 169 (II).
of the
SATURDAY, 4 NOVEMBER 2000 No.
Monday 6 November 2000
* The Chairman will give an oral briefing to interested members of the United Nations in the same conference room, immediately after the meeting.
Fifty-fifth session
Credentials of representatives to the fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly: first report of the Credentials Committee (A/55/537 and Corr.1)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Agency (A/55/284 and Corr.1)
Draft resolution (A/55/L.25)
Amendment (A/55/L.26)
Informal consultations on agenda item 20
(Strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance
of the United Nations, including special
economic assistance)
Informal consultations on draft proposals under item 20 and its sub-items conducted by H.E. Mr. Hubert Wurth (Luxembourg)
Committees
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories (A/55/453, A/55/261-265, A/55/373 and Add.1, A/55/ 392-S/2000/874, A/55/432-S/2000/921, A/55/466-S/2000/ 971, A/55/474-S/2000/984, A/55/490-S/2000/993, A/C.4/ 55/L.17-L.21)
General debate
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space (A/C.4/55/L.8/Rev.1 and L.9/Rev.1)
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, questions relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian questions (A/55/12 and Add.1, A/55/472 and A/55/506-S/2000/ 1006)
Dialogue with the High Commissioner for Refugees and general discussion
Advancement of women
Action on revised draft resolution A/C.3/55/L.16/Rev.1 and programme budget implications contained in A/C.3/ 55/L.33
Right of peoples to self-determination
Action on draft resolution A/C.3/55/L.32
Human rights questions: implementation of human rights instruments [114 (a)]
Action on draft resolutions A/C.3/55/L.29 and L.30
Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors (A/55/5 (Vols. I, III, IV) and Add.1-12, A/55/80 and Add.1, A/55/380 and Add.1, A/55/364 and A/55/487)
Introduction and general discussion
Human resources management (A/55/253 and Corr.1, A/55/270, A/55/168, A/55/427, A/55/499, A/55/ 399 and Corr.1, A/53/955, A/C.5/54/21, A/54/257, A/54/279 and Corr.1, A/C.5/55/L.3, A/C.5/54/L.3, A/C.5/ 54/2, A/54/450, A/C.5/55/CRP.1 and CRP.2)
Reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (A/55/397 and A/55/352 and Corr.1)
Report of the Joint Inspection Unit: Administration of Justice at the United Nations (A/55/57 and Add.1 and A/55/514)
Management irregularities causing financial losses to the Organization (also under agenda item 116) (A/54/793 and A/55/499)
Conclusion of general discussion
Programme planning (A/55/16, A/55/6 (Introduction and programmes 1-25), A/55/63, A/55/73, A/55/85, A/C.5/55/14, A/C.5/55/17, A/C.5/55/18, A/C.5/55/19 and A/C.5/55/20)
Conclusion of general discussion
Informal consultations on agenda item 121 (Pattern of conferences (A/55/32, A/55/134, A/55/182, A/55/259, A/55/ 410, A/55/430 and A/AC.172/2000/6))
Subjects
Executive session on the International Criminal Tribunals on Yugoslavia and Rwanda
Draft report
Mini-executive session on the report of the Panel on the United Nations Peace Operations
On Monday, 6 November 2000, there will be meetings of interested delegations on the following draft proposals, in Conference Room D: A/C.2/55/L.14 (item 95 (e)), from 3 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.; and A/C.2/55/L.6 (item 95), from 4.30 p.m. to 6 p.m.
The United Nations Administrative Tribunal will meet on Monday, 6 November 2000, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. in room DC2-470A.
The announcements in this section are reproduced as received.
of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the
Secretariat of the United Nations.
Monday, 6 November 2000
(on agenda item 173 (Towards global partnerships))
(on environmental issues)
(on agenda items 92 (a) (Trade and development) and 93 (b) (Business and development))
Hearings
As requested by the Preparatory Committee for the High-level International Intergovernmental Event on Financing for Development, hearings with civil society will be held on Mon-day and Tuesday, 6 and 7 November 2000, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. in Conference Room 4.
Members of permanent missions, Secretariat staff, United Nations agencies and representatives of non-govern-mental organizations are invited to attend.
For further information, please contact the Financing for Development Coordinating Secretariat (tel.
The Women's International Forum will meet on Monday, 6 November 2000, at 11 a.m. in the Dag Hammarskjöld Library Auditorium, to hear a presentation by Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta on "East Timor: Building a Nation from the Ashes of War".
Tuesday, 7 November 2000
Fifty-fifth session
Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity : report of the Secretary-General (A/55/498)
Cooperation between the United Nations and the Caribbean Community
Report of the Secretary-General (A/55/215)
Draft resolution (A/55/L.24)
Bethlehem 2000: draft resolution (A/55/L.3)
Committees
* Following the adjournment of the 23rd meeting of the Fifth Committee.
Committees
Briefing
There will be a briefing to provide an update on "The Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative" under the chairmanship of Mr. Alexandru Niculescu (Romania), Chairman of the Second Committee, on Wednesday, 8 November 2000, from 12 noon to 1 p.m. in the Trusteeship Council Chamber.
The moderator will be Mr. Sarbuland Khan, Director of the Division for ECOSOC Support and Coordination, Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
The briefing will be given by Mr. Axel van Trotsenburg, Manager, HIPC Implementation Unit, World Bank, and Ms. Dorris Ross, Division Chief, Policy Development Review Department, International Monetary Fund, as a contribution to the Second Committee debate on financing for development and macroeconomic issues, particularly external debt.
Members of permanent missions, Secretariat staff, representatives of non-governmental organizations and the media are invited to attend.
There will be a closed meeting of the Bureau of the Committee on Information on Tuesday, 7 November 2000, at 10 a.m. in room S-1027.
The Technical Subgroup of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Informatics will meet, under the chairmanship of H.E. Mr. Percy Metsing Mangoaela (Lesotho), on Wednesday, 8 November 2000, at 10 a.m. sharp, in Conference Room 9.
The announcements in this section are reproduced as received.
of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the
Secretariat of the United Nations.
There will be a meeting of the Group of 77 of the Second Committee (on agenda items 92 (b) (Business and development) and (c) (External debt crisis and development)) on Tuesday, 7 November 2000, from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. in Conference Room B.
There will be a meeting of the JUSCANZ Group (Second Committee) on Wednesday, 8 November 2000, from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m. in Conference Room A.
There will be a meeting of the JUSCANZ Group (Third Committee) on Wednesday, 8 November 2000, from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m. in Conference Room 7.
The briefing to Group of 77 Ambassadors and their experts by the Chief Executive and Chairman of the Global Environment Facility (GEF), Mr. Mohamed El-Ashry, will take place on Tuesday, 7 November 2000, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., on the agency's development programme to assist developing countries on the following issues: climate change, biological diversity, desertification and forests: (a) capacity-building; (b) technology transfer; and (c) adaptation.
Workshop
The United Nations University and the United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) are jointly organizing a workshop on "COP6 and the Kyoto Protocol Negotiations" as part of their annual Series on Sustainable Development in Practice.
The workshop, to be conducted in Eng-lish, will be held on Tuesday, 7 November 2000, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 2.30 p.m. to 6 p.m.
Briefing
The Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight Ser-vices will hold an informal briefing on the annual report of the Office for the period 1 July 1999 to 30 June 2000, for interested delegates, on Wednesday, 8 November 2000, at 2 p.m. in Conference Room 5.
The Office of the Special Co-ordinator for Africa and the Least Developed Countries (OSCAL) of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs will hold a briefing for African and other interested delegations on the progress report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s (documents A/55/350 and Add.1).
The briefing, will be held on Wednesday, 8 November 2000, at 3 p.m. in Conference Room A.
Workshop
The United Nations University will hold a workshop on "Building Conflict Prevention Capacity: Methods, Experiences, Needs" on Tuesday, 14 November 2000, from 9.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. in Conference Room A.
Members of permanent missions, Secretariat staff, representatives of non-governmental organizations and the media are invited to attend.
For further information, please contact the New York office of the United Nations University (tel.
Workshop
The United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) and the Seton Hall University School of Diplomacy and International Relations are jointly organizing a workshop in their Series on the Art of Public Speaking for members of permanent missions in New York.
The workshop, to be conducted in English, will be held on Thursday and Friday, 16 and 17 November, from 9.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.
A letter on this subject, including a detailed information note, a draft programme and a nomination form, was addressed to all the permanent missions.
The registration deadline is Thursday, 9 November.
For further information, please contact Ms. Cecelia Coleman (room DC1-603; tel.
Friday, 3 November 2000
4216th meeting
The situation in Sierra Leone
Report of the Security Council mission to Sierra Leone (S/2000/992)
Seventh report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (S/2000/1055)
The agenda was adopted without objection.
The President, with the consent of the Council, invited the representative of Sierra Leone, at his request, to participate in the discussion of the item without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Councils provisional rules of procedure.
The President made a statement on behalf of the Council (S/PRST/2000/31).
Fifty-fifth session
51st plenary meeting
Review of the problem of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in all its aspects
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/55/529)
Draft resolution (A/55/L.13)
Statements were made by the representatives of Haiti, Ethiopia, Japan, Monaco, Malaysia, Botswana, the Republic of Korea, Papua New Guinea, China, Saint Kitts and Nevis (on behalf of the Caribbean Community) and Fiji.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution 49/2 of 19 October 1994, the observer for the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies made a statement.
The representative of the Secretariat made a statement.
The General Assembly adopted draft resolution A/55/ L.13 (resolution 55/13).
The Assembly thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 179.
Strengthening of the United Nations system: draft resolution (A/55/L.19)
The General Assembly adopted draft resolution A/55/ L.19 (resolution 55/14).
The Assembly thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 61.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization of American States
Report of the Secretary-General (A/55/184)
Draft resolution (A/55/L.21)
The representative of Canada made a statement in the course of which he introduced draft resolution A/55/L.21.
Statements were made by the representatives of France (on behalf of the European Union and Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Norway, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and Turkey), Japan and Brazil.
The General Assembly adopted draft resolution A/55/ L.21 (resolution 55/15).
The Assembly decide to conclude its consideration of agenda item 21.
Committees
THIRD COMMITTEE 45th and 46th meetings
Note: The summary of the 45th and 46th meetings will appear in the next issue of the Journal (No.
FIFTH COMMITTEE 20th meeting
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments
The Committee began its consideration of this agenda item.
The Chairman made a statement regarding the procedures to be followed.
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/55/ 101 and A/C.5/55/4)
The Committee decided, by acclamation, to recommend that the General Assembly appoint Mr. E. Besley Maycock (Barbados) and Mr. Manlan Ahounou (Côte d'Ivoire) as members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2001.
The Committee then proceeded to vote, by secret ballot, on the two candidates from the African States to fill the one vacant seat of that region, the two candidates from the Asian States to fill the one vacant seat of that region and the two candidates from the Eastern European States to fill the one vacant seat of that region.
The results of the secret ballot were as follows:
African States
Mr. C.S.M.  Mselle (United Republic of Tanzania) 98 votes
Mr. Mathias Daka (Zambia) 67 votes
Asian States
Mr. Felipe Mabilangan (Philippines) 114 votes
Mr. Hasan M. Jawarneh (Jordan) 61 votes
Eastern European States
Mr. Andrzej T. Abraszewski (Poland) 113 votes
Mr. Yuri Orange (Belarus) 57 votes
Having obtained the required majority of votes, the Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly the appointment of Mr. C.S.M.
Mselle (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Felipe Mabilangan (Philippines), and Mr. Andrzej T. Abraszewski (Poland) as members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2001.
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions (A/55/102/Add.1-2 and A/C.5/55/5/ Add.1-2)
The Committee decided, by acclamation, to recommend that the General Assembly appoint Mr. Gebhard Benjamin Kandanga (Namibia), Mr. Chinmaya R. Gharekhan (India), Mr. Kazuo Watanabe (Japan), Mr. Petru Dimitriu (Romania), Mr. Ihor V. Humenny (Ukraine) and Mr. David A. Leis (United States of America) as members of the Committee on  Contributions for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2001.
The Committee also decided, by acclamation, to recommend to the General Assembly that it appoint Mr. Henry Fox (Australia) as a member of the Committee on Contributions as a result of the resignation of Mr. Neil Francis (Australia) for the remaining part of the term of office namely, beginning on the date of appointment by the General Assembly until 31 December 2001.
(c) Appointment of a member of the Board of Auditors (A/55/103 and A/C.5/55/6)
The Committee decided, by acclamation, to recommend that the General Assembly appoint the Court of Audit of France as a member of the Board of Auditors for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 July 2001.
(d) Confirmation of the appointment of members of the Investments Committee (A/55/104 and A/C.5/55/7)
The Committee decided, by acclamation, to recommend that the General Assembly confirm the appointment of Mr. Ahmad Abdullatif (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Fernando Chico Pardo (Mexico) and Mr. J.Y.
Pillay (Singapore) as members of the Investment Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2001.
(e) Appointment of members of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal (A/55/105 and A/C.5/55/8)
The Committee decided, by acclamation, to recommend that the General Assembly appoint Mr. Omer Yousif Bireedo (Sudan), Mr. Spyridon (Greece) and Ms. Brigitte Stern (France) as members of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2001.
(f) Appointment of members and alternate members of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee (A/55/ 106 and A/C.5/55/9 and Add.1)
The Committee decided, by acclamation, to recommend that the General Assembly appoint Ms. Valeria María González Posse (Argentina), Mr. Gerhard Kuntzle (Germany), Mr. Kenshiro Akimoto (Japan), Mr. P.R.O.
Owade (Kenya), Mr. Victor Vislykh (Russian Federation), Ms. Susan McLurg (United States of America), Mr. Riaz Hamidullah (Bangladesh) and Mr. Lovemore Mazemo (Zimbabwe) as members and alternate members of the United Nations Pension Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2001, which might be adjusted to conform to the decision that the General Assembly might take on the recommendation of the Pension Board contained in Annex XVI of its report (A/55/9).
(g) Appointment of members of the International Civil Service Commission (A/55/107 and A/C.5/55/10)
The Chairman informed the Committee that, in light of the statement made at the 19th meeting of the Fifth Committee, held on 2 November, it should be noted that the Government of the Philippines had decided to withdraw the candidature of Ms. Corazon Alma G.
De Leon from the list of candi-
dates for the elections to the International Civil Service Commission.
The Committee decided, by acclamation, to recommend that the General Assembly appoint Mr. Ernest Rusita (Uganda), Mr. El Hassane Zahid (Morocco), Mr. Asda Jayanama (Thailand), Mr. C.M. Shafi Sami (Bangladesh) and Mr. Alexei L. Fedotov (Russian Federation) as members of the International Civil Service Commission for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2001.
The Committee thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda sub-items 17 (a) to (g).
Organization of work
The Chairman made a statement.
21st meeting
Human resources management
Reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Report of the Joint Inspection Unit: Administration of Justice at the United Nations
Management irregularities causing financial losses to the Organization (also under agenda item 116)
The Committee resumed its consideration of this agenda item.
Statements were made by the representatives of Mongolia, the United States, Ukraine, Cuba, Ghana, Croatia, Ethiopia, Nepal, the Philippines, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Kuwait, Mali, the Syrian Arab Republic, Algeria,  Kazakhstan, Guinea Bissau, Pakistan, Indonesia, Chile and Bangladesh.
Organization of work
The Chairman made a statement.
SIXTH COMMITTEE 24th meeting
Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-second session
Statements were made by the representatives of Israel, the Netherlands, Bahrain, the Russian Federation, Brazil, Portugal, Venezuela, Turkey, Greece, Burkina Faso, Cameroon and Cuba, and by the observer for Switzerland.
The Chairman of the International Law Commission, Ambassador Chusei Yamada, made concluding remarks on the debate.
The Chairman also spoke.
Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its thirty-third session
The representative of Austria introduced draft resolution A/C.6/55/L.5.
Organization of work
The representative of Austria spoke.
[MULTILATERAL TREATIES DEPOSITED WITH
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL]
Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Seabed Authority.
Kingston, 27 March 1998
Ratification: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (2 November 2000)*
Agreement concerning the Establishing of Global Technical Regulations for Wheeled Vehicles, Equipment and Parts which can be fitted and/or be used on Wheeled Vehicles.
Geneva, 25 June 1998
Accession: Republic of Korea (2 November 2000)*
* Date of receipt of the relevant documents.
Chairmen of regional groups
The following information regarding the chairmanship of the regional groups for the month of November 2000 has been communicated to the Secretariat:
African States:
Mauritania
H.E. Mr. Mahfoudh Ould Deddach
Asian States:
Kyrgyzstan
H.E. Ms.Elmira S. Ibraimova
Eastern European States:
Slovenia
H.E. Mr. Ernest Petrič
Latin American and Caribbean States:
Brazil
H.E. Mr. Gelson Fonseca, Jr.
Western European and other States:
Germany
H.E. Mr. Dieter Kastrup
2 No.
2000/108 (I) No.
No.  No.
2000/213 No.
2000/215 No.
No.  No.
Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 12
integration of the human rights of women and
the gender perspective
United States of America and Venezuela: draft resolution
2000/… Elimination of violence against women
The Commission on Human Rights,
Reaffirming that discrimination on the basis of sex is contrary to the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and other international human rights instruments, and that its elimination is an integral part of efforts towards the elimination of violence against women,
Recalling its resolutions 1994/45 of 4 March 1994, in which it decided to appoint a special rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences, and 1997/44 of 11 April 1997, in which that mandate was renewed,
Welcoming the adoption by the General Assembly, in its resolution 48/104 of 20 December 1993, of the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, which recognizes that violence against women both violates and impairs or nullifies the enjoyment by women of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and expresses concern about the long-standing failure to protect and promote these rights and freedoms in relation to violence against women,
Welcoming the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women and follow-up action such as the agreed conclusions adopted by the Commission on the Status of Women on violence against women and on the other critical areas of concern identified in the Platform for Action,
Recalling that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights affirmed that gender-based violence and all forms of sexual harassment and exploitation, including those resulting from cultural prejudice and international trafficking, are incompatible with the dignity and worth of the human person and must be eliminated, and called for action to integrate the equal status and human rights of women into the mainstream of United Nations system-wide activity, stressed the importance of working towards the elimination of violence against women in public and private life, and urged the eradication of all forms of discrimination against women,
Deeply concerned that some groups of women, such as women belonging to minority groups, indigenous women, refugee women, migrant women, women living in rural or remote communities, destitute women, women in institutions or in detention, the girl child, women with disabilities, elderly women and women in situations of armed conflict, are especially targeted and vulnerable to violence,
Recalling the inclusion of gender-related crimes and crimes of sexual violence in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (A/CONF.183/9), which affirms that rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization and other forms of sexual violence constitute, in defined circumstances, a crime against humanity and a war crime, and reiterating that acts of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict can constitute serious violations or grave breaches of international humanitarian law,
Welcomes the report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences (E/CN.4/2000/68 and Add.  1-5), and encourages her in her future work;
Condemns all acts of gender-based violence against women and in this regard calls, in accordance with the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, for the elimination of all forms of gender-based violence in the family, within the general community and where perpetrated or condoned by the State, and emphasizes the duty of Governments to refrain from engaging in violence against women and to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and, in accordance with national legislation, punish acts of violence against women and to take appropriate and effective action concerning acts of violence against women, whether those acts are perpetrated by the State, by private persons or by armed groups or warring factions, and to provide access to just and effective remedies and specialized, including medical, assistance to victims;
Affirms that the term “violence against women” means any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life, and including domestic violence, “honour killings”, traditional practices harmful to women, including female genital mutilation, and forced marriages, and affirms that violence against women constitutes a violation of the rights and fundamental freedoms of women and impairs or nullifies their enjoyment of those rights and freedoms;
Encourages Governments and the United Nations system to ensure greater international cooperation in, and national attention to, acquiring data and developing indicators on the extent, nature and consequences of violence against women and girls, and on the impact and effectiveness of policies and programmes for combating this violence;
Welcomes the decision by the General Assembly to designate 25 November as the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women;
Also welcomes the establishment in March 1999 by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of a programme against trafficking in persons;
Encourages Governments to ensure that all international and national measures to eliminate trafficking, including the draft Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, promote and protect the human rights of victims;
Urges all Governments to mainstream a gender perspective, as appropriate, into national immigration and asylum policies, regulations and practices, in order to extend protection to those women whose claim for protection is based on gender-related persecution;
Requests all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in the performance of her mandated tasks and duties, to supply all information requested and to respond to the Special Rapporteur's visits and communications;
Welcomes the efforts of the Special Rapporteur to seek information from Governments concerning specific cases of alleged violence in order to identify and investigate situations of violence against women, its causes and consequences, in particular, where appropriate, by sending joint urgent appeals and communications with other special rapporteurs;
Invites the Special Rapporteur to continue to cooperate with other special rapporteurs, special representatives, independent experts and chairpersons of the working groups of the special procedures of the Commission on Human Rights, including, where appropriate, undertaking joint missions and writing joint reports;
Requests special rapporteurs responsible for various human rights questions, United Nations organs and bodies, specialized agencies and intergovernmental organizations, and encourages human rights treaty bodies, to give consideration to violence against women within their respective mandates and to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in the performance of her mandated tasks and duties, and in particular to respond to her requests for information on violence against women, its causes and consequences;
Stresses the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Rapporteur that States have an affirmative duty to promote and protect the human rights of women and must exercise due diligence to prevent all forms of violence against women, and calls upon States:
(a) To apply international human rights norms and to ratify and implement fully international human rights instruments that relate to violence against women;
(b) To include in reports submitted in accordance with the provisions of relevant United Nations human rights instruments sex-disaggregated data and, whenever possible, information pertaining to violence against women and measures taken to implement the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women and the Beijing Platform for Action;
(c) To condemn violence against women and not invoke custom, tradition or practices in the name of religion to avoid their obligations to eliminate such violence;
(d) To enact and, where necessary, reinforce or amend penal, civil, labour and administrative sanctions in domestic legislation to punish and redress the wrongs done to women and girls subjected to any form of violence, whether in the home, the workplace, the community or society, in custody or in situations of armed conflict, to ensure that they conform with relevant international human rights instruments and humanitarian law, and to take action to investigate and punish persons who perpetrate acts of violence against women;
(e) To consider undertaking comprehensive, objective and easily accessible information campaigns about violence against women;
(f) To establish and/or strengthen, at the national level, collaborative relationships with relevant non-governmental and community-based organizations, and with public and private sector institutions, aimed at the development and effective implementation of provisions and policies relating to violence against women, including in the area of support services to respond to the needs of women and girl survivors of violence and to assist them in their full recovery and reintegration into society;
(g) To create, improve or develop, as appropriate, and fund training programmes, taking into account, inter alia, sex-disaggregated data on the causes and effects of violence against women, for judicial, legal, medical, social, educational, police, correctional service, military, peacekeeping, humanitarian relief and immigration personnel, in order to avoid the abuse of power leading to violence against women and to sensitize such personnel to the nature of gender-based acts and threats of violence so that fair treatment of female victims can be ensured;
(h) To sensitize all persons, men and women, to the causes and effects of violence against women and to highlight men's role in its prevention and elimination, to encourage and support men's initiatives to complement the efforts of women's organization in this regard, and to encourage behavioural change by perpetrators of violence against women;
Reminds Governments that their obligations under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women must be implemented fully with regard to violence against women, taking into account General Recommendation No. 19 adopted by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women at its eleventh session, and calls upon those States which are still not parties to the Convention to work actively towards ratification of or accession to it so that universal ratification can be achieved by the end of the year 2000, and encourages all Member States to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Optional Protocol to the Convention;
Requests Governments to support initiatives of women's organizations and non-governmental organizations all over the world to raise awareness of the issue of violence against women and to contribute to its elimination;
Renews its request to the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Special Rapporteur with all necessary assistance, in particular the staff and resources required to perform all mandated functions, especially in carrying out and following up on missions undertaken either separately or jointly with other special rapporteurs and working groups, and adequate assistance for periodic consultations with the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and all other treaty bodies;
Decides to renew the mandate of the Special Rapporteur for a period of three years;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the reports of the Special Rapporteur are brought to the attention of the Commission on the Status of Women at its forty-fifth session, as well as to the attention of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women;
Decides to continue consideration of the question as a matter of high priority at its fifty-seventh session.
* In accordance with rule 69, paragraph 3, of the rules of procedure of the functional commissions of the Economic and Social Council.
Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 110
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
Protection of children affected by armed conflict
Note by the Secretary-General
The Secretary-General has the honour to transmit to the members of the General Assembly, in accordance with section VIII of Assembly resolution 54/149 of 17 December 1999, the report prepared by Olara A. Otunnu, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
Protection of children affected by armed conflict
Report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
Contents
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 51/77 of 12 December 1996, in which the Assembly requested the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to submit an annual report on the situation of children affected by armed conflict.
The report, the third since the mandate was established, covers activities undertaken by the Special Representative from the beginning of October 1999 to the end of September 2000.
In 1999 the General Assembly extended the mandate of the Special Representative for another three years beginning in September 2000.
The report, therefore, assesses overall progress achieved during the course of the initial three-year mandate and sketches an agenda for action for the years ahead.
This report should be read in conjunction with the report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict, which was submitted to the Security Council and the General Assembly on 19 July 2000 (A/55/163-S/2000/712).
The Special Representative served as focal point for the preparation of that report, which provides an overview of the efforts and challenges to protect children during and after conflicts, and presents a number of concrete recommendations.
Apart from those addressed specifically to the Security Council, those recommendations are for consideration and action by the General Assembly.
Since his appointment by the Secretary-General in September 1997 as Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, Olara A. Otunnu has sought to ensure that the protection and rights of war-affected children are comprehensively addressed by key actors at international, regional and national levels.
His role as public advocate and moral voice on behalf of the millions of children affected by conflict has centred on:
• Building greater awareness and mobilizing action;
• Proposing initiatives and engaging key actors to protect war-affected children;
• Promoting the application of international norms and traditional value systems that provide for the protection of children in times of conflict;
• Proposing concrete initiatives to protect children in the midst of war and engaging parties to conflict to undertake specific commitments in that context;
• Making the protection of children a priority concern in peace processes and peace operations and in all efforts to consolidate peace, heal and rebuild in the aftermath of conflict.
The Special Representative wishes to pay special tribute to Graça Machel, whose ground-breaking report in 1996 on the impact of armed conflict on children (A/51/306 and Add.1) provided the first comprehensive assessment of the multiple ways in which children suffer in times of armed conflict.
Her work laid the foundation for the present mandate and the growing efforts to protect children from war.
The activities of the Office of the Special Representative are funded entirely through voluntary contributions.
The Special Representative extends his deep appreciation to the following Governments for their generous contributions to the trust fund: Andorra, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Impact of armed conflict on children
Today, in as many as 50 countries around the world, children are suffering in the midst of armed conflict and its aftermath.
In the decade from 1986 to 1996, armed conflicts killed more than 2 million children, injured or disabled more than 6 million children, and left more than 1 million children orphaned.
At the present moment, there are over 22 million children who have been displaced by war within and outside their countries.
Increasingly children are specifically targeted, recruited as combatants or abducted to serve as sexual slaves.
The number of child combatants under the age of 18 is estimated at 300,000.
Each month, some 800 children are killed or maimed by landmines.
These harrowing statistics cannot describe the damage done to individual children who have endured the horror of war.
Today's civil wars, fought over power and resources, are exploiting, maiming and killing more children than ever.
Traditional authority figures and value systems, which have buffered children and women from harm in the past, are no longer respected.
During fighting, little distinction is made between civilians and combatants.
The vast majority of victims, up to 90 per cent, are civilians, mostly children and women.
This is soldier-on-civilian violence on an unprecedented scale.
Uprooted from their homes and communities, children are left without adequate food, shelter, education and health care.
Crops, schools, health clinics and sanitation systems are degraded or destroyed, fuelling high levels of malnutrition and disease.
Displaced adolescents are at increased risk of sexual abuse, sexually transmitted diseases, mental health problems, violence and substance abuse, and are particularly vulnerable to recruitment into armed forces or groups.
During and after war, thousands of children, especially girls, are made targets of sexual abuse and rape, which takes a tremendous physical and emotional toll.
Many children and their loved ones will fall victim to HIV/AIDS, which spreads especially rapidly in the corridors of conflict.
Although they are the least responsible for conflict, children suffer disproportionately from its impact.
Children who have experienced violence and killing, displacement, sexual abuse and violence, or loss of loved ones carry deep scars of fear and hatred, and need supportive caregivers and secure communities to heal.
There is an impressive array of international human rights and humanitarian instruments to protect children from the consequences of war — most notably the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Geneva Conventions — but parties to armed conflict continue to flout these norms.
International standards are violated with impunity.
The Special Representative strongly believes that the international community must now redirect its energies from the juridical task of developing standards to the political project of ensuring their application and respect on the ground.
We must launch “an era of application” — the application of international and local norms for the protection of children in times of armed conflict.
Activities and initiatives undertaken in the past year
In the period from October 1999 to September 2000, the Special Representative has been pursuing the following initiatives and activities:
International standards
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
A most important victory for children achieved during the reporting period is the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, under which the age limit for participation in hostilities is raised from 15 to 18.
The Special Representative, together with Member States, United Nations agencies, and non-governmental organizations — particularly the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers — lobbied hard for this important new instrument, which follows six years of difficult negotiations by the Working Group of the Commission on Human Rights.
The Protocol was adopted by the General Assembly on 25 May 2000 (resolution 54/263), and on 5 June it was opened for signature and ratification by all States that have signed or ratified the Convention.
The Optional Protocol sets the age limit for direct participation in hostilities and compulsory recruitment at 18 and prohibits insurgent armed groups “under any circumstances” from recruiting persons under 18 years or using them in hostilities.
The agreement falls short of the “straight 18” position that the Special Representative has advocated with respect to enlistment into national armed forces.
Nevertheless, the raising of the minimum age of voluntary enlistment to at least 16 and the inclusion of specific safeguards, including the provision of reliable proof of age and the informed consent of both volunteer and parents, represents an improvement on existing standards.
The Special Representative calls on all States to expedite their signing and ratification of the Optional Protocol, which will come into force three months after the deposit of the tenth ratification or accession.
At the urging of the Special Representative and UNICEF, the Optional Protocol was included in the list of “core treaties” to which the Secretary-General urged States to adhere during the Millennium Assembly.
To date, 70 States have signed the Optional Protocol and three have ratified it (Bangladesh, Canada and Sri Lanka).
The Special Representative urges States, when ratifying the Optional Protocol, to deposit binding declarations pursuant to the terms of article 3, establishing age 18 as the minimum age for voluntary recruitment into their national armed forces.
International Criminal Court
The Special Representative played the role of both catalyst and participant in efforts to ensure that the International Criminal Court protects the rights of children.
At the suggestion of the Special Representative, a steering committee was formed to inform participants in the Preparatory Commission for the Court about children's issues.
The Steering Committee on Children and Justice, comprising mostly non-governmental organizations, worked with the International Institute of Higher Studies in Criminal Sciences and the Government of Italy on an expert seminar in Siracusa, Italy, in February 2000 on the protection of children as victims and witnesses in the proceedings of the Court.
The recommendations of the seminar were submitted by the Government of Italy as formal proposals during the session of the Preparatory Commission held in March 2000, resulting in significant additions to the text of the Rules of Evidence and Procedure of the Court.
As a result of these initiatives, the Rules of Evidence and Procedure now include several important provisions designed to protect children.
The Rules provide for the appointment of a child-support person by the Victims and Witnesses Unit to facilitate the participation and protection of children as witnesses and to assist them through all stages of the proceedings.
The Rules also enable the Prosecutor to record the questioning of a child, especially in cases of sexual or gender violence, so as to reduce any subsequent traumatization.
To address foreseeable difficulties in notifying children of their right to participate, the Rules allow an application for participation to be made by a person acting on the child's behalf.
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
Following extensive lobbying by the Special Representative and non-governmental organizations with African Governments, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child — the first regional treaty establishing age 18 as a minimum age for all recruitment and participation in hostilities — entered into force in November 1999, following 15 ratifications.
The Special Representative urges the remaining African States to ratify this important instrument.
Security Council
During the reporting period, the Special Representative worked to ensure that the protection of children in situations of armed conflict remained a major concern of the Security Council, building particularly on Security Council resolution 1261 (1999), which is the first resolution devoted to children and armed conflict.
Resolution 1261 (1999) affirmed the issue as a peace and security concern, establishing an enabling political framework that sets out broad principles and provisions for the protection of war-affected children.
Since October 1999, some 37 debates, 7 resolutions, and 6 presidential statements have contained references and provisions on the protection of war-affected children.
In the second half of 1999 the Security Council adopted resolutions incorporating child protection into the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations in Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and approved the deployment of senior child protection advisers with both operations.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1261 (1999), the Special Representative has sought to ensure that the Secretary-General's regular reports to the Council on conflict situations pay special attention to the protection and rights of war-affected children.
During the reporting period, child protection sections and references were regularly included in the Secretary-General's reports to the Security Council on the situations in Angola, Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kosovo and East Timor, and thematic reports on the protection of civilians, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and sanctions.
The Office of the Special Representative has participated in task forces and working groups on country situations and various themes to systematically ensure appropriate inputs into the reports.
A significant development during the reporting period was the adoption of resolution 1314 (2000) by the Security Council on 11 August following its third open debate on children and armed conflict, held on 26 July.
Resolution 1314 (2000), the second Security Council resolution devoted specifically to children and armed conflict, was informed by the report of the Secretary-General.
The report itself, which was called for in Security Council resolution 1261 (1999), is the first ever to be submitted to the Council on the issue.
The Special Representative also arranged for Council members to have an exchange of views with a group of non-governmental organizations prior to the debate in an informal “Arria formula” briefing.
Security Council resolution 1314 (2000) builds on resolution 1261 (1999), by putting in place more targeted, action-oriented building blocks to protect children during and after conflict.
It calls for the protection of particularly vulnerable children, including internally displaced children, girls and abducted children.
Particular attention is paid to regional organizations, which are encouraged to establish child protection units, include child protection staff in their field operations, curb cross-border activities deleterious to children such as child recruitment and illicit trade.
The Council also calls for the strengthening of local capacities to protect children, and greater participation of young persons in peace-building programmes.
Report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council
As the focal point for the preparation of the Secretary-General's report on children and armed conflict (A/55/163-S/2000/712), the Special Representative initiated a highly consultative process to ensure a comprehensive document.
He actively sought inputs from all relevant key actors, including all peacekeeping operations, United Nations country teams, United Nations agencies and Secretariat departments, all Member States, non-governmental organizations, and individual experts.
In addition, he held special consultations with UNICEF.
The report, which contains a number of targeted and concrete recommendations, was submitted to the General Assembly and the Security Council highlighting the fact that the issue of children and armed conflict belongs on the agendas of both organs.
C. Regional organizations
The Special Representative has made it a priority to engage and encourage regional organizations to make the protection of children affected by armed conflict a vital aspect of their own agendas, and is very encouraged by the steps they have taken thus far.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
At the Review Conference of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) held at Istanbul in November 1999, the Special Representative proposed a 10-point agenda for dialogue, building on earlier efforts by non-governmental organizations.
Subsequently, participating States committed themselves in the Declaration adopted at the Istanbul Summit and in the Charter for European Security to develop and implement measures to actively promote children's rights and interests, with particular attention to the physical and psychological well-being of children in conflict and post-conflict situations.
They also decided to devote the OSCE Human Dimension Seminar for 2000 to the theme of children and armed conflict.
This forum, held in Warsaw in May 2000, produced a number of recommendations on how OSCE should integrate the protection and rights of children affected by armed conflict into its work.
The Chairperson-in-Office is working to ensure appropriate follow-up to these recommendations at the next meeting of the Ministerial Council in November 2000.
Council of Europe
In April 2000, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe held three debates highlighting the growing need to ensure the rights and protection of children continent-wide.
The Assembly agreed that child soldiers and young victims of the Kosovo conflict needed special support, and also backed plans for a European ombudsman for children.
European Union
In November 1999, on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the protection of war-affected children that supported raising the age limit for recruitment and participation in hostilities to 18.
This builds on a considerable body of initiatives and activities developed on the issue of children and armed conflict by the European Commission.
ACP-EU framework of cooperation
Key elements proposed by the Special Representative were endorsed by the Ministerial Negotiating Conference of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group and the European Union (ACP-EU) in 1999 and have been incorporated into the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement signed on 23 June 2000 in Benin.
These elements express the intention of the parties to address the problem of child soldiers; to protect children, especially girls, and ensure their rights; to promote reintegration and rehabilitation of children in post-conflict situations; and to demobilize and reintegrate former child soldiers.
In March 2000, the ACP-EU Joint Assembly adopted a comprehensive resolution on child soldiers.
Organization of African Unity
The Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity adopted the Algiers Declaration in 1999, reaffirming the determination of that organization to work relentlessly to promote the rights and welfare of the child, to combat all forms of child exploitation and to end the phenomenon of child soldiers.
Economic Community of West African States
The ministers of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in April 2000, at a conference sponsored by the Governments of Canada and Ghana with the active support and participation of the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS and the Special Representative, adopted a far-reaching declaration and plan of action to assist children affected by armed conflict in West Africa.
The Accra Declaration and Plan of Action contain several important elements, including monitoring the implementation of international norms and standards for child protection, instituting a week of truce for the benefit of war-affected children, training military and peacekeeping personnel in child rights and protection, establishing an office within the ECOWAS Secretariat to protect child victims of war, and controlling illegal cross-border activities through mechanisms such as the ECOWAS moratorium on the importation, exportation and manufacture of small arms.
The countries agreed to incorporate child protection into all ECOWAS peacemaking initiatives and peace operations, and to address the socio-economic and political factors that contribute to the occurrence of armed conflict.
Organization of American States
In June 2000, the General Assembly of the Organization of American States adopted a resolution on children and armed conflict, calling on all parties to armed conflict to respect international humanitarian law relevant to children and urging member States to support efforts to demobilize, reintegrate and rehabilitate children affected by conflict.
The Commonwealth
Following an appeal by the Special Representative, the Heads of Government of the Commonwealth, at their meeting in Durban in November 1999, issued the Durban Communiqué, in which they strongly condemned the targeting, abuse, recruitment and deployment of children in armed conflict, and called on all parties concerned to put an end to such practices.
G-8 industrialized countries
The Special Representative actively lobbied the G-8 industrialized countries to take up the issue of children affected by armed conflict and to promote its inclusion in their political declarations and commitments.
Subsequently, the G-8 Ministers for Foreign Affairs issued a report entitled “G-8 Miyazaki Initiatives for Conflict Prevention” at their pre-summit meeting in July 2000, identifying the plight of children affected by armed conflict as one of the most disturbing human security issues facing the world today.
The ministers promised to suppress armed conflict by removing the illicit arms and money that fuel it around the world and to cooperate with the United Nations to pressure perpetrators who either targeted or recruited children.
They set out concrete measures that can be taken by G-8 countries, either collectively or individually, to promote the protection of children during and after conflict.
Such measures include putting pressure on those who involve or target children in armed conflict; promoting the adoption and implementation of international standards and mechanisms; supporting global and regional outreach initiatives; promoting the protection, rights and welfare of children during peace negotiations, peace consolidation and post-conflict reconstruction; and supporting the work of the Special Representative and United Nations bodies including UNICEF.
United Nations system
The Special Representative continued to build collaboration with relevant entities of the United Nations system to further integrate the protection of children affected by armed conflict into their activities, planning, programming and budgeting.
Economic and Social Council
The Office of the Special Representative worked closely with UNICEF again this year to ensure that the report of the Secretary-General to the Economic and Social Council on strengthening the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations (A/55/82-E/2000/61) reflected key concerns about children affected by armed conflict.
The report emphasized the significance of Security Council resolutions 1261 (1999), 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000) on the protection of civilians.
The report also highlighted the importance of the deployment of child protection advisers in United Nations peacekeeping operations, and reiterated the Special Representative's call for concerted international pressure on parties that use child soldiers.
Commission on Human Rights
In April 2000, the Special Representative addressed the Commission on Human Rights at Geneva during its debate on the rights of the child, and presented his additional report (E/CN.4/2000/71).
He urged the Commission to make the rights of children affected by armed conflict a central concern throughout its activities and outcomes, including its monitoring actions, reports of special rapporteurs, experts, representatives and working groups, and resolutions.
To ensure that the Commission has reliable and adequate information on violations of the rights of children, he recommended that all relevant Secretariat reports to the Commission include sections on the fate of children affected by armed conflict.
The Special Representative also emphasized the important role that the Commission's extra-conventional mechanisms (country-specific and thematic mandates and working groups) and the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights can play to deepen the Commission's understanding of war-affected children and to contribute to the development of new human rights standards to help protect them.
The Special Representative called on the Commission on Human Rights and the wider human rights community to make systematic use of Security Council resolution 1261 (1999) as an advocacy tool for the protection of children in situations of armed conflict.
He met with several of the Commission's special rapporteurs and urged them and the Commission's working groups to incorporate the provisions of resolution 1261 (1999) into their work and to provide information about its implementation in their reports to the Commission.
Working group on the Optional Protocol
The Special Representative strongly supported the efforts of the Working Group of the Commission on Human Rights in drafting the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
He worked closely with the Chair and addressed the Working Group at its final session in January 2000, at which time he urged representatives to bring their negotiations to a close by agreeing on the highest possible standard of protection for children at risk of exploitation as combatants.
Committee on the Rights of the Child
The Special Representative maintained regular contact with the Committee on the Rights of the Child, which has the primary role in monitoring States parties' compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
In January 2000, the Office of the Special Representative provided a briefing to the Committee on recent initiatives, including Security Council resolution 1261 (1999) and the deployment of child protection advisers.
Committee members were particularly pleased that advisers shall, among other things, monitor implementation of the Convention and the preparation of State parties' reports to the Committee, and ensure that the Committee's concluding observations are integrated into the work of the peace operation.
In short, the advisers should prove to be an important new source of information linking the Committee with United Nations operations in the field.
The Office of the Special Representative provided background information and briefing papers to Committee members in advance of their deliberations on the reports of Sierra Leone and Colombia.
The Special Representative encourages international and local non-governmental organizations to provide information to the Committee, and encourages the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and UNICEF to support this process.
Department of Peacekeeping Operations
The Special Representative has worked very closely with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat to keep abreast of situations on the ground and to ensure that the protection of war-affected children is incorporated into the Secretary-General's reports to the Security Council.
The Office of the Special Representative participated in inter-agency task forces convened by the Department on particular conflict areas, including Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kosovo and East Timor.
The Office of the Special Representative also collaborated with the Department to develop lessons learned on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers in peacekeeping environments.
In addition, the Office of the Special Representative worked closely with the Department on the establishment of the role and the deployment of child protection advisers within United Nations peace operations.
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
The Special Representative held consultations with the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on several initiatives of mutual concern, including the implementation of Security Council resolution 1261 (1999), the provision of information to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, and follow-up to the work of the Commission on Human Rights relevant to children and armed conflict.
The Office of the Special Representative has continued to work with the Office of the High Commissioner to draft the terms of reference for child protection advisers and on the deployment of child protection staff within the human rights components of peacekeeping operations, and to ensure that United Nations peace operation personnel receive appropriate training in human rights and humanitarian law, particularly as it pertains to children, women, refugees and other vulnerable populations.
At the request of the Office of the High Commissioner, the Special Representative co-hosted the International Day of the World's Indigenous People on 9 August 2000 and opened a panel discussion on indigenous youth and armed conflict.
The Office of the Special Representative has maintained very active collaboration with the field presences of the Office of the High Commissioner in particular countries.
The field operation in Colombia has provided information on the protection of child rights in the context of the armed conflict there, and assisted in follow-up activities to the Special Representative's visit to Colombia in 1999.
The Special Representative's recommendation that two child rights officers be deployed to the human rights component of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) was accepted by the Security Council.
The presence of child rights officers together with the senior child protection adviser has helped to ensure greater attention to children's rights within the context of the peace process.
The field staff and presences of the Office of the High Commissioner have also supported the efforts of the Special Representative in Burundi.
The Special Representative has recommended that the Office of the High Commissioner look into the development of strategies to ensure the systematic integration of children's rights within its activities.
He has suggested that the Office develop greater expertise in particular areas of children's rights, including post-conflict situations and periods of “imperfect peace”, so that it can provide technical cooperation and further develop its role as a resource in this area.
Among specific activities that might be considered is the development of guidelines and monitoring manuals for the field offices and the special procedures.
The Special Representative has recommended that, as a general rule, monitoring and reporting on children's rights be included in the mandates of the field offices to ensure consistent attention to the issue, and that the offices be provided with experts where necessary.
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
The Special Representative has continued to collaborate closely with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in several areas.
UNHCR contributed to the drafting of the terms of reference for child protection advisers with peacekeeping operations.
UNHCR field offices in Burundi, Rwanda, Colombia, Sierra Leone and elsewhere have supported the Special Representative during his country visits and follow-up efforts.
The Special Representative is working with UNHCR to highlight the situation and improve response to the needs of internally displaced and refugee children.
He has sought to raise greater awareness of the need for systematic attention to refugee and internally displaced children.
In this regard, the Special Representative welcomed a recent initiative, endorsed by the Executive Committee of UNHCR, to deploy humanitarian security officers to crisis areas to assess the situation and provide expertise on special programmes relating to the prevention of sexual, gender-based, and domestic violence and the protection of refugee children from recruitment by armed forces or groups.
United Nations Children's Fund
In the reporting period, the Special Representative has devoted considerable time to discussions and consultations with the Executive Director and senior staff of UNICEF to build collaboration and support.
He collaborated with UNICEF on a wide range of initiatives, including the preparation of the Secretary-General's report to the Security Council on children and armed conflict, the development of terms of reference for child protection advisers and the subsequent recruitment and deployment of child protection advisers to particular peace operations, coordination for country visits, neighbourhood initiatives, and preparations for the special session of the General Assembly on the follow-up to the World Summit for Children in 2001.
The Special Representative also worked with UNICEF to advance the protection of children involved in truth and justice-seeking processes within the context of the Steering Committee on Children and Justice (see para.
The Special Representative has maintained a close working relationship with Francis Deng, Representative of the Secretary-General on internally displaced persons.
The Special Representative's country visits and advocacy have helped to generate and focus greater attention on the plight of internally displaced children.
In addition, the Special Representative has coordinated with the Representative on internally displaced persons on his country visits and on issues of mutual concern being raised in United Nations forums, including the Economic and Social Council and the Commission on Human Rights.
Executive committees
The Special Representative continued to work through the executive committee system within the United Nations to promote awareness and initiatives on behalf of children affected by armed conflict.
The Office of the Special Representative also actively participated in the Working Group on Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration of the Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs.
E. Placing protection of children on peace agendas
Children must be part of peace agendas, not only to address their needs and rights, but to ensure a lasting peace.
During the reporting period, the Special Representative worked to ensure that the Burundi peace agreement of 28 August 2000 fully incorporated the rights and protection of children.
He travelled to Sierra Leone and Northern Ireland to advocate that children's concerns be addressed as stipulated in the Lomé and Good Friday Agreements respectively, and that young people be involved in the consolidation of peace.
Neighbourhood initiatives
Although most of today's armed conflicts are internal, they are often exacerbated by cross-border activities, such as the flow of small arms, the illicit trade in natural resources, the recruitment and abduction of children, the movement of displaced persons and the separation of families.
To effectively address these threats, the Special Representative has developed “neighbourhood initiatives” to engage subregional actors in dialogue that would lead to specific agreements and concrete measures to protect children.
His efforts in the current reporting period have focused largely on West Africa.
Efforts in eastern Africa have also progressed, while efforts in the Balkan region, particularly the neighbourhood of Kosovo, have not advanced in the course of this reporting period.
West Africa neighbourhood
The Special Representative has sought to engage ECOWAS to address cross-border security issues in West Africa.
ECOWAS has played a prominent role in the effort to address armed conflict in the subregion, particularly in Liberia and Sierra Leone, including a moratorium on the importation, exportation and manufacture of small arms and light weapons.
The Office of the Special Representative has been working actively with ECOWAS and the Canadian Department of Foreign Affairs to establish a child protection unit within ECOWAS, as stipulated in the Accra Declaration and Plan of Action.
In August 2000, representatives of the Special Representative and the Canadian Department of Foreign Affairs conducted a needs assessment mission in Nigeria and Sierra Leone to identify gaps between the present capacities of ECOWAS and its requirements for the effective running of the Unit.
The Child Protection Unit will serve as a special advisory unit to the ECOWAS Executive Secretariat and is expected to be operational early in 2001.
The implementation of the Accra Declaration and Plan of Action will be the first stage in the Unit's long-term goal of preventing the systematic abuse of children and ensuring the promotion of their rights and welfare across West Africa.
The Unit will play a central role in coordinating national efforts and mechanisms for child protection, including in countries not directly affected by war.
Those mechanisms include, for example, the National Commission for War-Affected Children in Sierra Leone, the Eminent Persons Group for Children in Liberia and the Commission for Children in Ghana.
The Special Representative will continue to work closely with the Unit and monitor developments in ECOWAS, with a view to sharing this experience with other regional organizations.
Eastern Africa neighbourhood
In 1999, the Special Representative held discussions with the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Canada, Ghana, Kenya and Norway to seek their support in developing various initiatives to protect children from cross-border threats in East Africa.
The conference issued the Nairobi Declaration, which proposed a number of regional cooperative measures to curb illegal arms flows.
Neighbourhood of Kosovo
During the reporting period, the Special Representative sought to promote the neighbourhood initiative for Kosovo in the context of the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe.
He held extensive discussions on the matter at the OSCE Human Dimension Seminar on Children and Armed Conflict, held in Warsaw in May 2000.
The renewed outbreak of conflict in Kosovo interrupted earlier plans for a mission by the Special Representative to the region, but discussions on this have recently been renewed.
Country visits
During the reporting period, the Special Representative or representatives of his Office conducted field visits to Sierra Leone, Northern Ireland, East and West Timor, and Colombia.
The Special Representative paid a brief visit to Sierra Leone on 29 and 30 April 2000, jointly with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada, Lloyd Axworthy, immediately after the Accra conference on war-affected children.
The objectives of the mission were twofold: to follow up on previous visits and initiatives, especially the establishment of the National Commission for War-Affected Children and to draw attention on the ground to the outcome of the Accra conference.
It was his fourth visit to the country in two years.
The Special Representative and Mr. Axworthy were received by the President of Sierra Leone, Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, who updated them on developments in the peace process.
President Kabbah informed the Special Representative of his decision to establish a National Commission for War-Affected Children in Sierra Leone.
The Special Representative had urged the establishment of such a commission during his previous visits and welcomed this development.
He also welcomed the willingness of donor Governments, particularly Canada, to provide financial support for the establishment and functioning of the Commission.
The Special Representative has been working closely with the Government of Sierra Leone to put the structures in place for the establishment of the Commission.
In Sierra Leone, the Special Representative also visited war-affected children.
During the war, many children have been deliberately maimed, with their limbs brutally cut off.
Thousands of children have been abducted, forced to kill, and sexually abused.
The Special Representative and Mr. Axworthy visited the Murray Town Amputee and War Wounded Camp in Freetown and the St. Michael's Interim Care Centre in Lakka, both of which he had visited during his previous trip to Sierra Leone.
Thereafter, the Special Representative and Mr. Axworthy held separate meetings with Major Johnny Paul Koromah and Corporal Foday Sankoh, leader of the Revolutionary United Front; and held a joint meeting with a cross-section of leaders of civil society.
The Special Representative made the following observations during this visit to Sierra Leone:
(a) Security and disarmament.
There was a common perception that the prospects for conducting elections by next February were bleak if basic security arrangements could not be established.
Without disarmament and free access to all parts of Sierra Leone, questions would be raised about elections in which many might be unable to vote.
(b) The diamond factor.
There has been increasing recognition of the linkages between the illicit trafficking in diamonds from Sierra Leone and the fuelling of the conflict, which has had a disproportionate impact on children and civilians.
Sierra Leone civil society had gradually become involved in the campaign to raise international awareness on this issue.
The problem of illicit trafficking in diamonds served to compound the disarmament process given the relatively limited extent of disarmament and demobilization in diamond-producing areas.
(c) Marginalization of youth.
Many Sierra Leoneans expressed their concern about the growing alienation among young people, who feel used, discouraged and abandoned.
Many in this group suffer from illiteracy, and unemployment and are becoming victims of drug abuse.
There is much bitterness and anger within the youth population.
(d) The special problem of amputees.
Many of the same people the Special Representative had met during his earlier visit in September 1999 were still in residence at the Murray Town amputee camp this year.
The Government of Sierra Leone, with the help of the international community, faces the difficult challenge of providing longer-term, community-based physical and psychological recovery and social reintegration for this group of victims.
Such programmes should take particular care to foster the health, self-respect and dignity of child victims.
Visit of the Office of the Special Representative
During the reporting period, the Office of the Special Representative participated in a consultative workshop on the National Commission for War-Affected Children, convened from 16 to 18 August 2000 by the Government of Sierra Leone with the support of the UNICEF country office and the Government of Canada.
The workshop produced a set of recommendations regarding the structure, role and objectives of the National Commission and the procedures for its formal establishment.
The participants concluded that the Commission should be formally established early in 2001 and that its principal objectives should be:
• To advocate for and facilitate the implementation of international norms and standards on the rights of children and act as an ombudsman for children;
• To develop and help to implement policies to ensure access to education for war-affected children in collaboration with the Government and non-governmental organizations;
• To ensure access to basic services, particularly in the areas of health, education and social welfare for war-affected children;
• To facilitate the increased participation of young people in the peace-building and democratic processes;
• To develop strong linkages with other institutions (e.g., the proposed ECOWAS child protection unit).
Northern Ireland
The Special Representative visited Northern Ireland from 26 to 28 June 2000 to assess at first hand the impact of the “Troubles” on children, to see steps being taken to translate the provisions of the Good Friday Agreement into protection for children on the ground, to participate in an international conference on children and peace in Northern Ireland, to raise awareness of the importance of paying particular attention to children throughout the consolidation of peace, and to encourage and support the participation of young people in the building of peace across segregated communities and political divides.
During his visit, the Special Representative had meetings with the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Peter Mandelson; the Presiding Officer of the Northern Ireland Assembly, Lord Alderdice; the Lord Mayor of Belfast, Alderman Sammy Wilson; the Minister of Education for Northern Ireland, Martin McGuinness; Ministers Denis Haughey and Dermot Nesbitt from the offices of the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister; and the Victims Commissioner, Sir Kenneth Bloomfield; Marie Smyth, of the Cost of the Troubles Study Project and representative of Community Conflict Impact on Children; Sheri Chamberlein, Director of Save the Children/Northern Ireland; and Mike Aaronson, Director-General of Save the Children/UK.
He met with some 30 local non-governmental organizations involved in the promotion and protection of children's rights in Northern Ireland.
He visited several Nationalist and Unionist communities in Belfast, including Ardoyne, New Lodge and the Shankill Road.
He held extensive discussions with young people, as well as with the Youth Forum, a non-governmental organization that engages young people as active citizens to make changes in their society, and with the Youth Committee, comprising young people from across Northern Ireland who had taken an active role in preparing the conference and hosting his visit.
He commended efforts to develop cross-community initiatives such as the government-funded Education for Mutual Understanding programme, which employs curricular projects as well as sport and the arts to bridge the sectarian divide.
He visited two partner schools involved in the programme, St. Theresa's (Catholic) and Elmgrove (Protestant).
The Special Representative gave a keynote address at the conference held on the theme Building the Future: Young People and the Troubles, which was hosted by Community Conflict Impact on Children and Save the Children/Northern Ireland.
The principal objectives of the conference were to highlight the effect of the troubles on children; examine the ways in which other societies have addressed similar circumstances; and bring together experts to share their experiences with people in Northern Ireland.
Although the long-standing conflict in Northern Ireland has been one of low intensity and therefore quite different from situations of full-blown war, it has nevertheless had a significant impact on children.
The visit reinforced the Special Representative's conviction that children's concerns must remain priority concerns throughout the building of peace and that the voices of young people should be heard throughout peace processes.
He was very impressed by the capacity of the young people he spent time with to reach out and embrace reconciliation in spite of their own devastating personal experiences arising from the conflict.
He learned from the experiences of government leaders, non-governmental organization representatives, and researchers he met, and shared with them many of the lessons he has learned from other conflict situations:
(a) Sustained and concerted attention to children is needed throughout the consolidation of peace.
The Special Representative was very encouraged during the visit by the commitment of political leaders to the Good Friday Agreement and the positive initiatives undertaken at local levels for the benefit of children by non-governmental organizations and educators.
The Special Representative appealed to political leaders to address the basic concerns of children in Northern Ireland, particularly social and educational integration, youth unemployment, substance abuse and poverty, improved access to health facilities and housing, increased access to counselling, and improved administration of child protection and juvenile justice.
(b) A new body is needed to consolidate the focus on children's rights in Northern Ireland.
The Special Representative expressed strong support for the establishment of a new body dedicated to promoting children's rights in Northern Ireland and ensuring that the concerns of young people are translated into policy-making, priority-setting and sustained resource allocation.
Ideas under discussion among non-governmental organizations, children's rights groups, and political leaders include the establishment of a cabinet Ministry for Children, a Commission for Children, and an Ombudsman for Children.
The lessons learned from other post-conflict situations demonstrate that in the absence of such a body it is easy to overlook children's rights, with children and the wider society paying a high price later for such neglect.
(c) Remove children from paramilitary activity and address issues of community security.
The Special Representative urges all parties to the Good Friday Agreement to insist that paramilitary organizations refrain immediately from recruiting or using children in the youth wings of their organizations or involving them in violence in any way.
(d) Support the capacity of families and teachers to protect children.
Family stability and support help mediate the impact of violence on children.
Parents have an essential role to play in dispelling myths about “others” and fomenting a culture of respect for diversity.
The Government needs to provide more support for families and parents affected by violence, living in segregated environments, and hampered in their own ability to build bridges with neighbouring communities.
Educators and other members of civil society working to encourage cross-community links need to be given adequate and sustained support.
(e) Bring lessons learned elsewhere to bear on behalf of children in Northern Ireland.
The Special Representative found young people, representatives of non-governmental organizations, politicians and educators to be very interested in the lessons learned from similar situations elsewhere in the world, particularly concerning the needs of children and victims in highly segregated societies.
More must be done at the national and international levels to develop an accessible body of lessons learned in the area of protection and rehabilitation of children affected by violence.
The Special Representative intends to continue his collaboration with young people, non-governmental organizations and government decision makers in Northern Ireland, and to assist them in their effort to construct community-based programmes for children affected by the troubles, on the basis of international best practice in this area, as called for in the Good Friday Agreement.
(f) Ensure youth participation in the consolidation of peace in Northern Ireland.
The Special Representative was particularly heartened by the determination of young people he met to reach out to one another across community lines; many were very impressive in articulating their personal commitment to tolerance and their aspirations for a peaceful Northern Ireland.
He strongly encouraged youth participation in the building and consolidation of peace in Northern Ireland.
He urged the Youth Committee, the Youth Forum, students involved in the Education for Mutual Understanding programme, and other young people across Northern Ireland to consolidate their priorities into a manifesto or agenda for children.
He encouraged children across Northern Ireland to reach out to one another, and initiated a discussion of the possibility of linking children in Northern Ireland to children in other societies as a part of the children-to-children network initiative.
He urged political leaders, members of civil society, and non-governmental organizations to listen and respond to the voices of young people.
East and West Timor
The Office of the Special Representative undertook a joint mission to East and West Timor from 14 to 21 June 2000 with the Japan Committee for UNICEF and its Goodwill Ambassador.
The visit enabled the Office to assess at first hand the situation of children in East Timor after the violence that followed the national consultation of 1999, and the condition of child refugees in West Timor, and to consult with various actors regarding concrete measures to ensure the protection and rights of children during the reconstruction period.
On-site visits were conducted to refugee camps in West Timor.
In East Timor assessment visits were conducted to assistance projects and local communities, primary schools, a training workshop for youth groups, an orphanage and a childcare centre.
Meetings and consultations were also held with members of the United Nations country team including the United Nations Transitional Authority in East Timor (UNTAET), UNICEF, UNHCR, the World Bank, representatives of international non-governmental organizations, and local political leaders.
Following the popular consultation on the future status of East Timor, held in August 1999, over one third of East Timor's population of 890,000 persons fled or were forced to cross the border into West Timor.
This relatively large influx placed particular strain on the local population, which in certain communities has been outnumbered by refugees.
Some 126,000 remain in refugee camps or local communities in West Timor.
Registration of the refugee population remains incomplete, but United Nations agencies estimate that the majority of the population is made up of women and children.
Most refugees live in improvised shelters and overcrowded environments, their access to health care and food is limited, most severely, during the rainy season.
There have been reports of violence and intimidation in the camps.
The explosive violence that followed the referendum destroyed the basic health and education infrastructure of East Timor.
UNICEF estimates that some 90 per cent of schools were destroyed or badly damaged.
In addition, there is a shortage of human resources, including teachers at the secondary school and higher education levels and health care providers.
Local and international groups in East Timor are debating how best to protect children who have been separated from their families or orphaned.
A consortium of international non-governmental organizations reports a significant number of children experiencing psychosocial problems as a result of their exposure to the violence.
Adolescents who have lost access to schooling also face a high unemployment rate and rising living costs.
Gangs and crimes are reportedly on the rise among young people.
Impressive efforts have been made to protect children during the emergency and the ensuing reconstruction phases in East Timor.
On the basis of on-site assessments and consultations on the ground, the Office of the Special Representative has put forward several recommendations intended to enhance existing efforts and ensure that children's concerns are given due consideration in all relevant policy discussions and the design and implementation of relevant programmes.
These recommendations include:
• The establishment of a national commission for children;
• The placement of a senior child protection adviser within UNTAET;
• The integration of child-related provisions into legislation and policy-making;
• The provision of child rights training for United Nations peacekeeping personnel;
• Awareness-building concerning child rights among the general population;
• Programmes to address psychosocial trauma;
• Local capacity-building;
• Early rehabilitation of basic services and the development of radio programming for children.
Colombia
The Special Representative visited Colombia from 7 to 9 April 2000 to attend the Thirteenth Ministerial Conference of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Cartagena.
During his visit, the Special Representative spent time at the Nelson Mandela settlement outside the city, home to an estimated 25,000 internally displaced people.
He was able to assess at first hand the situation of internally displaced children in the region, following last year's longer visit to Colombia, and to consult with the main agencies working with displaced persons on the ground.
During the reporting period, the Special Representative followed the situation in Colombia closely, particularly concerning his appeals last year to bring to an end the practice of child soldiering in Colombia.
On 27 December 1999, he congratulated the Government of Colombia for discharging the final contingent of 950 soldiers under the age of 18.
In April 2000, after another appeal from the Special Representative, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) said they had “committed an error” in recruiting youth under 15 and had repudiated the practice.
On 5 May, the Special Representative called on FARC to take verifiable concrete action towards demobilizing those children.
H. Outreach to women's organizations
Women constitute a powerful force for peace and the protection of children during and after armed conflict.
The Special Representative continued his efforts to bring women's voices into peacemaking processes and to work with women's organizations to promote the protection of war-affected children.
In February, he addressed African women leaders who were participating in a programme entitled “The Great Lakes Initiative: Women as Partners for Peace”, sponsored by the United States Department of State.
In March, the Special Representative spoke to the Women's Caucus for Gender Justice.
In April, the Special Representative addressed the international conference in support of Sudanese women's participation in the Sudan peace process, sponsored by the Government of the Netherlands, at Maastricht.
In May, he addressed the annual meeting of the Sierra Leone Women's Movement for Peace.
During the non-governmental organization Millennium Forum he held consultations with women's groups from the Sudan and Uganda, who were seeking to build effective regional women's peace networks.
In June, he participated in a panel on advancing the protection of internally displaced women and children, held during the special session of the General Assembly devoted to the five-year review of the Beijing Conference.
He gave the keynote address at the annual Voices of Courage awards of the Women's Commission for Refugee Women and Children.
The Special Representative, via satellite link, addressed the Women as Partners for Peace Conference held at Kigali in June 2000.
The objective of this gathering of 180 African women from Angola, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Rwanda, the Sudan and Zimbabwe was to develop an agenda for women's role in peace processes to ensure that women become more systematically a part of the search for peace and for solutions in conflict situations in Africa.
Non-governmental organizations
Non-governmental organizations play an indispensable role in shaping the agenda for children affected by armed conflict.
The Special Representative continued to work closely with them to build national and international advocacy movements, develop operational programmes on the ground to meet children's needs, and monitor and share information concerning the protection of children in particular conflict situations.
In the reporting period, the Special Representative sought the input of non-governmental organizations to the Secretary-General's report to the Security Council on children and armed conflict.
In March 2000, an international consultation of non-governmental organizations on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1261 (1999) was organized by World Vision, together with the Office of the Special Representative and the Sub-Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict of the non-governmental organization Committee on UNICEF, and in May 2000 a similar consultation was held at New York University's Center for the Study of International Organizations.
In June, at the request of the Special Representative, World Vision organized a discussion among non-governmental organizations in Geneva to provide input into the Secretary-General's report.
In July, the Security Council heard directly from non-governmental organizations when the Special Representative facilitated an Arria formula informal briefing by representatives of the International Save the Children Alliance, World Vision, the Women's Commission for Refugee Women and Children, InterAction, the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, the International Rescue Committee, the International Action Network for Small Arms, and Médecins du Monde.
The Special Representative worked actively to support the campaign of Save the Children/UK on behalf of internally displaced children; their recent report War Brought Us Here has especially highlighted this issue.
He commends their Portrait Pledge for internally displaced children, which was presented to the Secretary-General in New York in July 2000.
During the reporting period, the Special Representative addressed a number of important non-governmental organization forums including the non-governmental organization Millennium Forum in New York, which featured 1,350 representatives of civil society from 113 countries.
He also addressed events sponsored by the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers and the German National Committee for UNICEF to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child; the millennium lecture “Innocent victims — protecting children in times of conflict”, organized by Save the Children/UK; the launch of the Campaign for Sensitization on Children and Armed Conflict by the Ministry of Labour of Spain and the Spanish National Committee for UNICEF; the International Symposium on Children and Armed Conflict of the Japan National Committee for UNICEF; the National High School Model United Nations Assembly of the United States of America; the eleventh Annual Youth Conference, organized by Global Kids; and the annual meeting of the International Save the Children Alliance.
The Special Representative was an expert witness at special hearings organized by the UK Foreign Office and Save the Children/UK on the issue of child soldiers.
The Office of the Special Representative also participated in the first hearings on the protection of war-affected children: securing children's rights in the context of armed conflict, organized by the International Bureau for Children's Rights and the Children and Armed Conflict Unit of the University of Essex.
J. Opinion makers
The forums included the Global Peace and Tolerance Awards at United Nations Headquarters; the Youth and Peace Symposium, with Archbishop Desmond Tutu; the seminar for editors on the theme “Conflicts and war crimes: challenges for coverage”, organized by the Crimes of War Project and Freedom Forum; the annual Seminar on Peacemaking and Peacekeeping of the International Peace Academy in New York; the launch and first meeting of the Steering Committee of Global Action to Prevent War, Genocide and Internal Armed Conflict; the Fiesta Women 2000 event of the Japan Global Forum; the international humanitarian assistance course of the Center for International Health and Cooperation; the Center for the Global South in Washington, D.C.; the conference on African refugees and the United States response: 20 years of resettlement, organized by the Ethiopian Community Development Council; and the conference on preparing to lead: the role of global corporations in the twenty-first century, of the Aspen Institute.
He also addressed the Millennium World Peace Summit of Religious and Spiritual Leaders.
In September, the Special Representative discussed the issue of children and conflict on a panel of the State of the World Forum, together with the Executive Director of UNICEF.
In June, he briefed business leaders at a meeting on the theme “The United Nations and business: a partnership for the new millennium” organized by the United Nations Office for Project Services.
Media
Media outreach is a crucial part of the Special Representative's advocacy work.
During the past year, he contributed opinion pieces to several influential newspapers including the Washington Post, the Los Angeles Times, the Globe and Mail and El Tiempo.
Articles or editorials on the work of his Office also appeared in newspapers and magazines including The New York Times, the Washington Post, El País, Yomiuri Shimbun, the Boston Globe, Le Nouvel Observateur, Der Spiegel, the Economist Intelligence Unit, El Espectador, Newsweek, Istoé, Die Presse and the TWA in-flight magazine.
On television, he appeared twice on the CNN International programme Q & A with Riz Khan, took part in the network's millennium round-table discussion programme and appeared in the powerful CNN documentary Cry Freetown.
He also took part in programmes as diverse as Foreign Correspondent (ABC, Australia), The National Magazine (CBC, Canada) and Human Rights, Human Wrongs (BBC 2, United Kingdom).
He also served as a panellist at the New York screening of the HBO film Children in War.
The Special Representative participated in the Aspen Institute's fiftieth anniversary symposium on globalization and the human condition; this was subsequently broadcast on the United States cable channel C-Span.
In addition, he took part in a special edition of David Gergen's World at Large programme on United States public television.
On radio, the Special Representative participated in several BBC projects, including Visionaries, Suffer the Children and the live BBC World Service online phone-in programme Talking Point.
BBC Radio 4's profile of the Special Representative, Children in Arms, won a One World Broadcasting Award for the advancement of children's rights.
He was also interviewed by networks including National Public Radio (United States), Radio France Internationale, Radio Japan (NHK), Radio Netherlands and the Voice of America.
Video news releases were produced from material from Albania, Colombia, Sierra Leone and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, which were used by CNN International, CNN Spanish, BBC World television, NHK and various national channels.
Developing the web site
The Office of the Special Representative put considerable effort into the development of a comprehensive and user-friendly web site, which is regularly updated to include the latest information, fact sheets, press releases and country profiles, as well as important United Nations documents and links to selected non-governmental organizations.
The site benefited from a new graphic design, structural improvements and streamed video/audio content.
The address is www.un.org/children/conflict.
Progress achieved during the first mandate
* Introduction to The Impact of Armed Conflict on Children: A critical review of progress made and obstacles encountered in increasing protection for war-affected children (forthcoming).  There has indeed been great progress in many areas…One of the crucial recommendations in the original report has been fulfilled beyond expectation with the appointment of Mr. Olara Otunnu as the Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
His advocacy on behalf of war-affected children has raised the profile of this issue to the extent that is now placed firmly on the international peace and security agenda.
Over the past three years, the work of the Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, non-governmental organizations, United Nations agencies, and Governments, has resulted in tangible progress in respect of children affected by armed conflict.
Advocacy and engagement on the issue has increased dramatically.
Children are now more central to the peace and security agenda.
War crimes against children have been prosecuted and violations are now being documented and reported more systematically.
International standards have been strengthened.
Children are actively involved in building peace.
Humanitarian assistance is increasingly focusing on meeting the rights and needs of war-affected children.
Warring parties have made concrete commitments to respecting children's rights and international humanitarian law.
However, while significant progress has been achieved, action to protect children must be deepened and intensified.
Placing war-affected children high on the international political agenda
Advocacy by the Special Representative and other key actors has succeeded in placing the protection and rights of war-affected children high on the international political agenda.
Security Council
The Special Representative has made it a priority to make the protection of children affected by armed conflict a major issue on the agenda of the Security Council.
Over the course of the first mandate this has translated into a number of concrete outcomes.
• June 1998: The Council held its first open debate on the issue of children and armed conflict and issued a presidential statement, which set the foundation for further engagement.
• August 1999: Second open debate on children and armed conflict and adoption of resolution 1261 (1999).
This is a landmark for war-affected children, which formally affirms that that their protection is a peace and security concern which belongs on the agenda of the Security Council.
• August 1999: Child protection was included in the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone and the deployment of a senior child protection adviser was approved.
• November 1999: Child protection was included in the mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo together with the deployment of child protection advisers to that mission.
• July 2000: The Secretary-General submitted to the Security Council the first report devoted to children and armed conflict.
• July 2000: Third open debate on children and armed conflict.
